Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 31, Number 2—Spring 2017—Pages 211–236

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016
Election
Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

A

merican democracy has been repeatedly buffeted by changes in media technology. In the 19th century, cheap newsprint and improved presses allowed
partisan newspapers to expand their reach dramatically. Many have argued
that the effectiveness of the press as a check on power was significantly compromised as a result (for example, Kaplan 2002). In the 20th century, as radio and then
television became dominant, observers worried that these new platforms would
reduce substantive policy debates to sound bites, privilege charismatic or “telegenic”
candidates over those who might have more ability to lead but are less polished, and
concentrate power in the hands of a few large corporations (Lang and Lang 2002;
Bagdikian 1983). In the early 2000s, the growth of online news prompted a new set
of concerns, among them that excess diversity of viewpoints would make it easier
for like-minded citizens to form “echo chambers” or “filter bubbles” where they
would be insulated from contrary perspectives (Sunstein 2001a, b, 2007; Pariser
2011). Most recently, the focus of concern has shifted to social media. Social media
platforms such as Facebook have a dramatically different structure than previous
media technologies. Content can be relayed among users with no significant third
party filtering, fact-checking, or editorial judgment. An individual user with no
track record or reputation can in some cases reach as many readers as Fox News,
CNN, or the New York Times.

■

Hunt Allcott is Associate Professor of Economics, New York University, New York City,
New York. Matthew Gentzkow is Professor of Economics, Stanford University, Stanford,
California. Both authors are Research Associates, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
†
For supplementary materials such as appendices, datasets, and author disclosure statements, see the
article page at
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.31.2.211
doi=10.1257/jep.31.2.211

212

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Following the 2016 election, a specific concern has been the effect of false
stories—“fake news,” as it has been dubbed—circulated on social media. Recent
evidence shows that: 1) 62 percent of US adults get news on social media (Gottfried
and Shearer 2016); 2) the most popular fake news stories were more widely shared
on Facebook than the most popular mainstream news stories (Silverman 2016);
3) many people who see fake news stories report that they believe them (Silverman
and Singer-Vine 2016); and 4) the most discussed fake news stories tended to favor
Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton (Silverman 2016). Putting these facts together,
a number of commentators have suggested that Donald Trump would not have
been elected president were it not for the influence of fake news (for examples, see
Parkinson 2016; Read 2016; Dewey 2016).
Our goal in this paper is to offer theoretical and empirical background to
frame this debate. We begin by discussing the economics of fake news. We sketch
a model of media markets in which firms gather and sell signals of a true state of
the world to consumers who benefit from inferring that state. We conceptualize
fake news as distorted signals uncorrelated with the truth. Fake news arises in equilibrium because it is cheaper to provide than precise signals, because consumers
cannot costlessly infer accuracy, and because consumers may enjoy partisan news.
Fake news may generate utility for some consumers, but it also imposes private and
social costs by making it more difficult for consumers to infer the true state of the
world—for example, by making it more difficult for voters to infer which electoral
candidate they prefer.
We then present new data on the consumption of fake news prior to the election. We draw on web browsing data, a new 1,200-person post-election online survey,
and a database of 156 election-related news stories that were categorized as false by
leading fact-checking websites in the three months before the election.
First, we discuss the importance of social media relative to sources of political
news and information. Referrals from social media accounted for a small share of
traffic on mainstream news sites, but a much larger share for fake news sites. Trust in
information accessed through social media is lower than trust in traditional outlets.
In our survey, only 14 percent of American adults viewed social media as their “most
important” source of election news.
Second, we confirm that fake news was both widely shared and heavily tilted
in favor of Donald Trump. Our database contains 115 pro-Trump fake stories that
were shared on Facebook a total of 30 million times, and 41 pro-Clinton fake stories
shared a total of 7.6 million times.
Third, we provide several benchmarks of the rate at which voters were exposed
to fake news. The upper end of previously reported statistics for the ratio of page
visits to shares of stories on social media would suggest that the 38 million shares
of fake news in our database translates into 760 million instances of a user clicking
through and reading a fake news story, or about three stories read per American
adult. A list of fake news websites, on which just over half of articles appear to be false,
received 159 million visits during the month of the election, or 0.64 per US adult. In
our post-election survey, about 15 percent of respondents recalled seeing each of 14

Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

213

major pre-election fake news headlines, but about 14 percent also recalled seeing a
set of placebo fake news headlines—untrue headlines that we invented and that never
actually circulated. Using the difference between fake news headlines and placebo
headlines as a measure of true recall and projecting this to the universe of fake news
articles in our database, we estimate that the average adult saw and remembered 1.14
fake stories. Taken together, these estimates suggest that the average US adult might
have seen perhaps one or several news stories in the months before the election.
Fourth, we study inference about true versus false news headlines in our survey
data. Education, age, and total media consumption are strongly associated with
more accurate beliefs about whether headlines are true or false. Democrats and
Republicans are both about 15 percent more likely to believe ideologically aligned
headlines, and this ideologically aligned inference is substantially stronger for
people with ideologically segregated social media networks.
We conclude by discussing the possible impacts of fake news on voting patterns
in the 2016 election and potential steps that could be taken to reduce any negative
impacts of fake news. Although the term “fake news” has been popularized only
recently, this and other related topics have been extensively covered by academic
literatures in economics, psychology, political science, and computer science. See
Flynn, Nyhan, and Reifler (2017) for a recent overview of political misperceptions.
In addition to the articles we cite below, there are large literatures on how new information affects political beliefs (for example, Berinsky 2017; DiFonzo and Bordia
2007; Taber and Lodge 2006; Nyhan, Reifler, and Ubel 2013; Nyhan, Reifler, Richey,
and Freed 2014), how rumors propagate (for example, Friggeri, Adamic, Eckles,
and Cheng 2014), effects of media exposure (for example, Bartels 1993, DellaVigna
and Kaplan 2007, Enikolopov, Petrova, and Zhuravskaya 2011, Gerber and Green
2000, Gerber, Gimpel, Green, and Shaw 2011, Huber and Arceneaux 2007,
Martin and Yurukoglu 2014, and Spenkuch and Toniatti 2016; and for overviews,
DellaVigna and Gentzkow 2010, and Napoli 2014), and ideological segregation in
news consumption (for example, Bakshy, Messing, and Adamic 2015; Gentzkow and
Shapiro 2011; Flaxman, Goel, and Rao 2016).

Background: The Market for Fake News
Definition and History
We define “fake news” to be news articles that are intentionally and verifiably
false, and could mislead readers. We focus on fake news articles that have political
implications, with special attention to the 2016 US presidential elections. Our definition includes intentionally fabricated news articles, such as a widely shared article
from the now-defunct website denverguardian.com with the headline, “FBI agent
suspected in Hillary email leaks found dead in apparent murder-suicide.” It also
includes many articles that originate on satirical websites but could be misunderstood as factual, especially when viewed in isolation on Twitter or Facebook feeds.
For example, in July 2016, the now-defunct website wtoe5news.com reported that

214

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Pope Francis had endorsed Donald Trump’s presidential candidacy. The WTOE 5
News “About” page disclosed that it is “a fantasy news website. Most articles on wtoe5news.com are satire or pure fantasy,” but this disclaimer was not included in the
article. The story was shared more than one million times on Facebook, and some
people in our survey described below reported believing the headline.
Our definition rules out several close cousins of fake news: 1) unintentional
reporting mistakes, such as a recent incorrect report that Donald Trump had
removed a bust of Martin Luther King Jr. from the Oval Office in the White House;
2) rumors that do not originate from a particular news article; 1 3) conspiracy theories (these are, by definition, difficult to verify as true or false, and they are typically
originated by people who believe them to be true); 2 4) satire that is unlikely to be
misconstrued as factual; 5) false statements by politicians; and 6) reports that are
slanted or misleading but not outright false (in the language of Gentzkow, Shapiro,
and Stone 2016, fake news is “distortion,” not “filtering”).
Fake news and its cousins are not new. One historical example is the “Great
Moon Hoax” of 1835, in which the New York Sun published a series of articles about
the discovery of life on the moon. A more recent example is the 2006 “Flemish
Secession Hoax,” in which a Belgian public television station reported that the
Flemish parliament had declared independence from Belgium, a report that a
large number of viewers misunderstood as true. Supermarket tabloids such as the
National Enquirer and the Weekly World News have long trafficked in a mix of partially
true and outright false stories.
Figure 1 lists 12 conspiracy theories with political implications that have circulated over the past half-century. Using polling data compiled by the American
Enterprise Institute (2013), this figure plots the share of people who believed each
statement is true, from polls conducted in the listed year. For example, substantial
minorities of Americans believed at various times that Franklin Roosevelt had prior
knowledge of the Pearl Harbor bombing, that Lyndon Johnson was involved in the
Kennedy assassination, that the US government actively participated in the 9/11
bombings, and that Barack Obama was born in another country.
The long history of fake news notwithstanding, there are several reasons to
think that fake news is of growing importance. First, barriers to entry in the media
industry have dropped precipitously, both because it is now easy to set up websites
and because it is easy to monetize web content through advertising platforms.
Because reputational concerns discourage mass media outlets from knowingly
reporting false stories, higher entry barriers limit false reporting. Second, as we
discuss below, social media are well-suited for fake news dissemination, and social
1
Sunstein (2007) defines rumors as “claims of fact—about people, groups, events, and institutions—that
have not been shown to be true, but that move from one person to another, and hence have credibility
not because direct evidence is available to support them, but because other people seem to believe
them.”
2
Keeley (1999) defines a conspiracy theory as “a proposed explanation of some historical event (or events)
in terms of the significant causal agency of a relatively small group of persons—the conspirators––acting
in secret.”

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election

215

Figure 1
Share of Americans Believing Historical Partisan Conspiracy Theories
1975: The assassination of Martin Luther King
was the act of part of a large conspiracy
1991: President Franklin Roosevelt knew Japanese
plans to bomb Pearl Harbor but did nothing
1994: The Nazi extermination of millions
of Jews did not take place
1995: FBI deliberately set the Waco fire
in which the Branch Davidians died
1995: US government bombed the government building
in Oklahoma City to blame extremist groups
1995: Vincent Foster, the former aide to
President Bill Clinton, was murdered
1999: The crash of TWA Flight 800 over Long Island
was an accidental strike by a US Navy missile
2003: Lyndon Johnson was involved in the
assassination of John Kennedy in 1963
2003: Bush administration purposely misled the public
about evidence that Iraq had banned weapons
2007: US government knew the 9/11 attacks were
coming but consciously let them proceed
2007: US government actively planned or
assisted some aspects of the 9/11 attacks
2010: Barack Obama was born in another country

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Share of people who believe it is true (%)

Note: From polling data compiled by the American Enterprise Institute (2013), we selected all
conspiracy theories with political implications. This figure plots the share of people who report
believing the statement listed, using opinion polls from the date listed.

media use has risen sharply: in 2016, active Facebook users per month reached 1.8
billion and Twitter’s approached 400 million. Third, as shown in Figure 2A, Gallup
polls reveal a continuing decline of “trust and confidence” in the mass media “when
it comes to reporting the news fully, accurately, and fairly.” This decline is more
marked among Republicans than Democrats, and there is a particularly sharp
drop among Republicans in 2016. The declining trust in mainstream media could
be both a cause and a consequence of fake news gaining more traction. Fourth,
Figure 2B shows one measure of the rise of political polarization: the increasingly
negative feelings each side of the political spectrum holds toward the other. 3 As we
3
The extent to which polarization of voters has increased, along with the extent to which it has been
driven by shifts in attitudes on the right or the left or both, are widely debated topics. See Abramowitz
and Saunders (2008), Fiorina and Abrams (2008), Prior (2013), and Lelkes (2016) for reviews.

216

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 2
Trends Related to Fake News
A: Trust in Mainstream Media
80

Percent Great deal/Fair amount

Democrats
60
Overall
40

Republicans

20

0
1998

2002

2006

2010

2014

B: Feeling Thermometer toward Other Political Party

Feeling thermometer
(0 = least positive, 100 = most)

50

Republicans’ feeling thermometer
toward Democratic Party

40

30
Democrats’ feeling thermometer
toward Republican Party
20
1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

Note: Panel A shows the percent of Americans who say that they have “a great deal” or “a fair
amount” of “trust and confidence” in the mass media “when it comes to reporting the news fully,
accurately, and fairly,” using Gallup poll data reported in Swift (2016). Panel B shows the average
“feeling thermometer” (with 100 meaning “very warm or favorable feeling” and 0 meaning “very
cold or unfavorable feeling”) of Republicans toward the Democratic Party and of Democrats
toward the Republican Party, using data from the American National Election Studies (2012).

Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

217

discuss below, this could affect how likely each side is to believe negative fake news
stories about the other.
Who Produces Fake News?
Fake news articles originate on several types of websites. For example, some
sites are established entirely to print intentionally fabricated and misleading
articles, such as the above example of denverguardian.com. The names of these
sites are often chosen to resemble those of legitimate news organizations. Other
satirical sites contain articles that might be interpreted as factual when seen out
of context, such as the above example of wtoe5news.com. Still other sites, such as
endingthefed.com, print a mix between factual articles, often with a partisan slant,
along with some false articles. Websites supplying fake news tend to be short-lived,
and many that were important in the run-up to the 2016 election no longer exist.
Anecdotal reports that have emerged following the 2016 election provide
a partial picture of the providers behind these sites. Separate investigations by
BuzzFeed and the Guardian revealed that more than 100 sites posting fake news
were run by teenagers in the small town of Veles, Macedonia (Subramanian 2017).
Endingthefed.com, a site that was responsible for four of the ten most popular
fake news stories on Facebook, was run by a 24-year-old Romanian man (Townsend
2016). A US company called Disinfomedia owns many fake news sites, including
NationalReport.net, USAToday.com.co, and WashingtonPost.com.co, and its owner
claims to employ between 20 and 25 writers (Sydell 2016). Another US-based
producer, Paul Horner, ran a successful fake news site called National Report for
years prior to the election (Dewey 2014). Among his most-circulated stories was
a 2013 report that President Obama used his own money to keep open a Muslim
museum during the federal government shutdown. During the election, Horner
produced a large number of mainly pro-Trump stories (Dewey 2016).
There appear to be two main motivations for providing fake news. The first
is pecuniary: news articles that go viral on social media can draw significant advertising revenue when users click to the original site. This appears to have been the
main motivation for most of the producers whose identities have been revealed. The
teenagers in Veles, for example, produced stories favoring both Trump and Clinton
that earned them tens of thousands of dollars (Subramanian 2017). Paul Horner
produced pro-Trump stories for profit, despite claiming to be personally opposed to
Trump (Dewey 2016). The second motivation is ideological. Some fake news providers
seek to advance candidates they favor. The Romanian man who ran endingthefed.
com, for example, claims that he started the site mainly to help Donald Trump’s
campaign (Townsend 2016). Other providers of right-wing fake news actually say
they identify as left-wing and wanted to embarrass those on the right by showing that
they would credulously circulate false stories (Dewey 2016; Sydell 2016).
A Model of Fake News
How is fake news different from biased or slanted media more broadly? Is
it an innocuous form of entertainment, like fictional films or novels? Or does it

218

Journal of Economic Perspectives

have larger social costs? To answer these questions, we sketch a model of supply
and demand for news loosely based on a model developed formally in Gentzkow,
Shapiro, and Stone (2016).
There are two possible unobserved states of the world, which could represent
whether a left- or right-leaning candidate will perform better in office. Media firms
receive signals that are informative about the true state, and they may differ in the
precision of these signals. We can also imagine that firms can make costly investments to increase the accuracy of these signals. Each firm has a reporting strategy
that maps from the signals it receives to the news reports that it publishes. Firms
can either decide to report signals truthfully, or alternatively to add bias to reports.
Consumers are endowed with heterogeneous priors about the state of the world.
Liberal consumers’ priors hold that the left-leaning candidate will perform better in
office, while conservative consumers’ priors hold that the right-leaning candidate
will perform better. Consumers receive utility through two channels. First, they want
to know the truth. In our model, consumers must choose an action, which could
represent advocating or voting for a candidate, and they receive private benefits if
they choose the candidate they would prefer if they were fully informed. Second,
consumers may derive psychological utility from seeing reports that are consistent
with their priors. Consumers choose the firms from which they will consume news
in order to maximize their own expected utility. They then use the content of the
news reports they have consumed to form a posterior about the state of the world.
Thus, consumers face a tradeoff: they have a private incentive to consume precise
and unbiased news, but they also receive psychological utility from confirmatory
news.
After consumers choose their actions, they may receive additional feedback
about the true state of the world—for example, as a candidate’s performance is
observed while in office. Consumers then update their beliefs about the quality of
media firms and choose which to consume in future periods. The profits of media
firms increase in their number of consumers due to advertising revenue, and media
firms have an incentive to build a reputation for delivering high levels of utility
to consumers. There are also positive social externalities if consumers choose the
higher-quality candidate.
In this model, two distinct incentives may lead firms to distort their reports in the
direction of consumers’ priors. First, when feedback about the true state is limited,
rational consumers will judge a firm to be higher quality when its reports are closer
to the consumers’ priors (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2006). Second, consumers may
prefer reports that confirm their priors due to psychological utility (­Mullainathan
and Shleifer 2005). Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Stone (2016) show how these incentives can lead to biased reporting in equilibrium, and apply variants of this model to
understand outcomes in traditional “mainstream” media.
How would we understand fake news in the context of such a model? Producers
of fake news are firms with two distinguishing characteristics. First, they make no
investment in accurate reporting, so their underlying signals are uncorrelated with
the true state. Second, they do not attempt to build a long-term reputation for

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election

219

quality, but rather maximize the short-run profits from attracting clicks in an initial
period. Capturing precisely how this competition plays out on social media would
require extending the model to include multiple steps where consumers see “headlines” and then decide whether to “click” to learn more detail. But loosely speaking,
we can imagine that such firms attract demand because consumers cannot distinguish them from higher-quality outlets, and also because their reports are tailored
to deliver psychological utility to consumers on either the left or right of the political spectrum.
Adding fake news producers to a market has several potential social costs. First,
consumers who mistake a fake outlet for a legitimate one have less-accurate beliefs
and are worse off for that reason. Second, these less-accurate beliefs may reduce
positive social externalities, undermining the ability of the democratic process to
select high-quality candidates. Third, consumers may also become more skeptical
of legitimate news producers, to the extent that they become hard to distinguish
from fake news producers. Fourth, these effects may be reinforced in equilibrium by
supply-side responses: a reduced demand for high-precision, low-bias reporting will
reduce the incentives to invest in accurate reporting and truthfully report signals.
These negative effects trade off against any welfare gain that arises from consumers
who enjoy reading fake news reports that are consistent with their priors.

Real Data on Fake News
Fake News Database
We gathered a database of fake news articles that circulated in the three
months before the 2016 election, using lists from three independent third parties.
First, we scraped all stories from the Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton tags on
Snopes (snopes.com), which calls itself “the definitive Internet reference source for
urban legends, folklore, myths, rumors, and misinformation.” Second, we scraped
all stories from the 2016 presidential election tag from PolitiFact (politifact.com),
another major fact-checking site. Third, we use a list of 21 fake news articles that
had received significant engagement on Facebook, as compiled by the news outlet
BuzzFeed (Silverman 2016).4 Combining these three lists, we have a database of
156 fake news articles. We then gathered the total number of times each article was
shared on Facebook as of early December 2016, using an online content database
called BuzzSumo (buzzsumo.com). We code each article’s content as either proClinton (including anti-Trump) or pro-Trump (including anti-Clinton).
This list is a reasonable but probably not comprehensive sample of the major
fake news stories that circulated before the election. One measure of comprehensiveness is to look at the overlap between the lists of stories from Snopes, PolitiFact,
and BuzzFeed. Snopes is our largest list, including 138 of our total of 156 articles. As
4

Of these 21 articles, 12 were fact-checked on Snopes. Nine were rated as “false,” and the other three
were rated “mixture,” “unproven,” and “mostly false.”

220

Journal of Economic Perspectives

a benchmark, 12 of the 21 articles in the BuzzFeed list appear in Snopes, and 4 of
the 13 articles in the PolitiFact appear in Snopes. The lack of perfect overlap shows
that none of these lists is complete and suggests that there may be other fake news
articles that are omitted from our database.
Post-Election Survey
During the week of November 28, 2016, we conducted an online survey of
1208 US adults aged 18 and over using the SurveyMonkey platform. The sample
was drawn from SurveyMonkey’s Audience Panel, an opt-in panel recruited from
the more than 30 million people who complete SurveyMonkey surveys every month
(as described in more detail at https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/audience/).
The survey consisted of four sections. First, we acquired consent to participate
and a commitment to provide thoughtful answers, which we hoped would improve
data quality. Those who did not agree were disqualified from the survey. Second,
we asked a series of demographic questions, including political affiliation before
the 2016 campaign, vote in the 2016 presidential election, education, and race/
ethnicity. Third, we asked about 2016 election news consumption, including time
spent on reading, watching, or listening to election news in general and on social
media in particular, and the most important source of news and information about
the 2016 election. Fourth, we showed each respondent 15 news headlines about the
2016 election. For each headline, we asked, “Do you recall seeing this reported or
discussed prior to the election?” and “At the time of the election, would your best
guess have been that this statement was true?” We also received age and income
categories, gender, and census division from profiling questions that respondents
had completed when they first started taking surveys on the Audience panel. The
survey instrument can be accessed at https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/RSYD75P.
Each respondent’s 15 news headlines were randomly selected from a list of
30 news headlines, six from each of five categories. Within each category, our list
contains an equal split of pro-Clinton and pro-Trump headlines, so 15 of the 30 articles favored Clinton, and the other 15 favored Trump. The first category contains
six fake news stories mentioned in three mainstream media articles (one in the New
York Times, one in the Wall Street Journal, and one in BuzzFeed) discussing fake news
during the week of November 14, 2016. The second category contains the four
most recent pre-election headlines from each of Snopes and PolitiFact deemed to
be unambiguously false. We refer to these two categories individually as “Big Fake”
and “Small Fake,” respectively, or collectively as “Fake.” The third category contains
the most recent six major election stories from the Guardian’s election timeline.
We refer to these as “Big True” stories. The fourth category contains the two most
recent pre-election headlines from each of Snopes and PolitiFact deemed to be
unambiguously true. We refer to these as “Small True” stories. Our headlines in
these four categories appeared on or before November 7.
The fifth and final category contains invented “Placebo” fake news headlines,
which parallel placebo conspiracy theories employed in surveys by Oliver and Wood
(2014) and Chapman University (2016). As we explain below, we include these

Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

221

Placebo headlines to help control for false recall in survey responses. We invented
three damaging fake headlines that could apply to either Clinton or Trump, then
randomized whether a survey respondent saw the pro-Clinton or pro-Trump
version. We experimented with several alternative placebo headlines during a pilot
survey, and we chose these three because the data showed them to be approximately equally believable as the “Small Fake” stories. (We confirmed using Google
searches that none of the Placebo stories had appeared in actual fake news articles.) Online Appendix Table 1, available with this article at this journal’s website
(http://e-jep.org), lists the exact text of the headlines presented in the survey. The
online Appendix also presents a model of survey responses that makes precise the
conditions under which differencing with respect to the placebo articles leads to
valid inference.
Yeager et al. (2011) and others have shown that opt-in internet panels such
as ours typically do not provide nationally representative results, even after
reweighting. Notwithstanding, reweighting on observable variables such as education and internet usage can help to address the sample selection biases inherent in
an opt-in internet-based sampling frame. For all results reported below, we reweight
the online sample to match the nationwide adult population on ten characteristics that we hypothesized might be correlated with survey responses, including
income, education, gender, age, ethnicity, political party affiliation, and how often
the respondent reported consuming news from the web and from social media. The
online Appendix includes summary statistics for these variables; our unweighted
sample is disproportionately well-educated, female, and Caucasian, and those who
rely relatively heavily on the web and social media for news. The Appendix also
includes additional information on data construction.

Social Media as a Source of Political Information
The theoretical framework we sketched above suggests several reasons why social
media platforms may be especially conducive to fake news. First, on social media,
the fixed costs of entering the market and producing content are vanishingly small.
This increases the relative profitability of the small-scale, short-term strategies often
adopted by fake news producers, and reduces the relative importance of building a
long-term reputation for quality. Second, the format of social media—thin slices of
information viewed on phones or news feed windows—can make it difficult to judge
an article’s veracity. Third, Bakshy, Messing, and Adamic (2015) show that Facebook
friend networks are ideologically segregated—among friendships between people
who report ideological affiliations in their profiles, the median share of friends with
the opposite ideology is only 20 percent for liberals and 18 percent for conservatives—and people are considerably more likely to read and share news articles that
are aligned with their ideological positions. This suggests that people who get news
from Facebook (or other social media) are less likely to receive evidence about the
true state of the world that would counter an ideologically aligned but false story.

222

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 3
Share of Visits to US News Websites by Source

Direct
browsing
48.7

Top news sites

Other
links
10.6

Search
engines
30.6

Social
media
10.1

Other links

Direct
browsing
30.5

Fake news sites

0

20

Other
links
5.7

Search
engines
22.0

40
60
Weighted average of percentage (%)

Social
media
41.8

80

100

Note: This figure presents the share of traffic from different sources for the top 690 US news
websites and for 65 fake news websites. “Other links” means impressions that were referred from
sources other than search engines and social media. “Direct browsing” means impressions that did
not have a referral source. Sites are weighted by number of monthly visits. Data are from Alexa.

One way to gauge the importance of social media for fake news suppliers is to
measure the source of their web traffic. Each time a user visits a webpage, that user
has either navigated directly (for example, by typing www.wsj.com into a browser)
or has been referred from some other site. Major referral sources include social
media (for example, clicking on a link in the Facebook news feed) and search
engines (for example, searching for “Pope endorsed Trump?” on Google and
clicking on a search result). Figure 3 presents web traffic sources for the month
around the 2016 US presidential election (late October through late November)
from Alexa (alexa.com), which gathers data from browser extensions installed
on people’s computers as well as from measurement services offered to websites.
These data exclude mobile browsing and do not capture news viewed directly on
social media sites, for example, when people read headlines within Facebook or
Twitter news feeds.
The upper part of the graph presents referral sources for the top 690 US news
sites, as ranked by Alexa. The lower part of the graph presents web traffic sources for
a list of 65 major fake news sites, which we gathered from lists compiled by Zimdars
(2016) and Brayton (2016). For the top news sites, social media referrals represent
only about 10 percent of total traffic. By contrast, fake news websites rely on social

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election

223

media for a much higher share of their traffic. This demonstrates the importance
of social media for fake news providers. While there is no definitive list of fake news
sites, and one might disagree with the inclusion or exclusion of particular sites in
this list of 65, this core point about the importance of social media for fake news
providers is likely to be robust.
A recent Pew survey (Gottfried and Shearer 2016) finds that 62 percent of US
adults get news from social media. To the extent that fake news is socially costly and
fake news is prevalent on social media, this statistic could appear to be cause for
concern. Of this 62 percent, however, only 18 percent report that they get news from
social media “often,” 26 percent do so “sometimes,” and 18 percent do so “hardly
ever.” By comparison, the shares who “often” get news from local television, national
broadcast television, and cable television are 46 percent, 30 percent, and 31 percent
respectively. Moreover, only 34 percent of web-using adults trust the information
they get from social media “some” or “a lot.” By contrast, this share is 76 percent for
national news organizations and 82 percent for local news organizations.
The results of our post-election survey are broadly consistent with this picture.
For the month before the 2016 election, our respondents report spending 66
minutes per day reading, watching, or listening to election news. (Again, these and
all other survey results are weighted for national representativeness.) Of this, 25
minutes (38 percent) was on social media. Our survey then asked, “Which of these
sources was your most important source of news and information about the 2016
election?” The word “important” was designed to elicit a combination of consumption frequency and trust in information. Figure 4 presents responses. In order, the
four most common responses are cable TV, network TV, websites, and local TV.
Social media is the fifth most common response, with 14 percent of US adults listing
social media as their most “important” news source.
Taken together, these results suggest that social media have become an important but not dominant source of political news and information. Television remains
more important by a large margin.

Partisanship of Fake News
In our fake news database, we record 41 pro-Clinton (or anti-Trump) and 115
pro-Trump (or anti-Clinton) articles, which were shared on Facebook a total of
7.6 million and 30.3 million times, respectively. Thus, there are about three times
more fake pro-Trump articles than pro-Clinton articles, and the average pro-Trump
article was shared more on Facebook than the average pro-Clinton article. To be
clear, these statistics show that more of the fake news articles on these three factchecking sites are right-leaning. This could be because more of the actual fake news
is right-leaning, or because more right-leaning assertions are forwarded to and/or
reported by fact-checking sites, or because the conclusions that fact-checking sites
draw have a left-leaning bias, or some combination. Some anecdotal reports support
the idea that the majority of election-related fake news was pro-Trump: some fake

224

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 4
Most Important Source of 2016 Election News

19.2%
Network TV

23.5%
Cable TV

14.8% Website

Local TV
14.5%

Radio

Social
media

6.2%

Print
8.0%

13.8%

Notes: Our post-election survey asked, “Which of these sources was your most important source
of news and information about the 2016 election?” This figure plots responses. Observations are
weighted for national representativeness.

news providers reportedly found higher demand for pro-Trump (or anti-Clinton)
fake news, and responded by providing more of it (Sydell 2016).
There could be several possible explanations for a preponderance of proTrump fake news. The more marked decline of trust in the mainstream media
among Republicans shown in Figure 2 could have increased their relative demand
for news from nontraditional sources, as could a perception that the mainstream
media tended to favor Clinton. Pro-Trump (and anti-Clinton) storylines may have
simply been more compelling than pro-Clinton (and anti-Trump) storylines due to
particulars of these candidates, perhaps related to the high levels of media attention
that Trump received throughout the campaign. Or, it could theoretically be that
Republicans are for some reason more likely to enjoy or believe fake news.
Some prior evidence argues against the last hypothesis. McClosky and Chong
(1985) and Uscinski, Klofstad, and Atkinson (2016) find that people on the left
and right are equally disposed to conspiratorial thinking. Furthermore, Bakshy,
Messing, and Adamic (2015) find that conservatives are actually exposed to more
cross-cutting news content than liberals, which could help conservatives to be better
at detecting partisan fake news. Below, we present further evidence on this hypothesis from our survey.

Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

225

Exposure to Fake News
How much fake news did the typical voter see in the run-up to the 2016 election? While there is a long literature measuring media exposure (for example, Price
and Zaller 1993), fake news presents a particular challenge: much of its circulation
is on Facebook (and other social media) news feeds, and these data are not public.
We provide three benchmarks for election-period fake news exposure, which we
report as average exposure for each of the 248 million American adults.
First, we can use prior evidence to predict the number of times the articles
in our database were read based on the number of times they were shared. The
corporate website of Eventbrite (2012) reports that links to its events on Facebook
generate 14 page visits per share. A blog post by Jessica Novak (undated) reports
that for a set of “top performing” stories on Facebook the ratio of visits to shares
was also 14. Zhao, Wang, Tao, Ma, and Guan (2013) report that the ratio of views to
shares for videos on the Chinese social networking site Renren ranges from 3 to 8.
Based on these very rough reference points, we consider a ratio of 20 page visits per
share as an upper bound on the plausible range. This implies that the 38 million
shares of fake news in our database translate into 760 million page visits, or about
three visits per US adult.
Second, we can use web browsing data to measure impressions on fake news
websites. For the month around the 2016 election, there were 159 million impressions on the 65 websites in the bottom part of Figure 3, or 0.64 impressions per
adult. This is dwarfed by the 3 billion impressions on the 665 top news websites over
the same period. Furthermore, not all content on these 65 sites is false: in a random
sample of articles from these sites, we categorized just under 55 percent as false,
either because the claim was refuted by a mainstream news site or fact-checking
organization, or because the claim was not covered on any other sites despite being
important enough that it would have been covered on other sites if it were true.
When comparing these first two approaches to estimating election-period fake news
exposure, remember that the first approach uses cumulative Facebook shares as
of early December 2016 for fake news articles that were fact-checked in the three
months before the election, while the second approach uses web traffic from a one
month period between late October to late November 2016.
Third, we can use our post-election survey to estimate the number of articles
respondents saw and remembered. The survey gave respondents 15 news headlines—three headlines randomly selected from each of the five categories detailed
earlier—and asked if they recalled seeing the headline (“Do you recall seeing this
reported or discussed prior to the election?”) and if they believed it (“At the time of
the election, would your best guess have been that this statement was true?”).
Figure 5 presents the share of respondents that recalled seeing (left bar) and
seeing and believing (right bar) headlines, averaging responses across all the headlines within each of our main categories. Rates of both seeing and believing are
much higher for true than fake stories, and they are substantially higher for the
“Big True” headlines (the major headlines leading up to the election) than for the

226

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 5
Percent of US Adult Population that Recall Seeing or that Believed Election
News

Percent of US Adult population

80
Recalled seeing
Recalled seeing and believed
60

40

20

0

Big true

Small true

Fake

Placebo

Notes: In our post-election survey, we presented 15 headlines. For each headline, the survey asked
whether respondents recall seeing the headline (“Do you recall seeing this reported or discussed
before the election?”) and whether they believed it (“At the time of the election, would your best
guess have been that this statement was true?”). The left bars present the share of respondents who
recall seeing the headlines in each category, and the right bars present the share of respondents
who recall seeing and believed the headlines. “Big True” headlines are major headlines leading up
to the election; “Small True” headlines are the minor fact-checked headlines that we gathered from
Snopes and PolitiFact. The Placebo fake news headlines were made-up for the research and never
actually circulated. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.

“Small True” headlines (the minor fact-checked headlines that we gathered from
Snopes and PolitiFact). The Placebo fake news articles, which never actually circulated, are approximately equally likely to be recalled and believed as the Fake news
articles which did actually circulate. This implies that there is a meaningful rate of
false recall of articles that people never actually saw, which could cause the survey
measure to significantly overstate true exposure. On the other hand, people likely
forgot some of the Fake articles that they were actually exposed to, which causes the
survey responses to understate true exposure.
In summary, one can think of recalled exposure as determined both by actual
exposure and by the headline’s perceived plausibility—people might think that if a
headline is plausible, they probably saw it reported somewhere. Then, we show that
if the Placebo headlines are equally plausible as the Fake headlines, the difference
between recall of Fake and Placebo headlines represents the rate of true exposure that
was remembered. The Appendix available online with this paper at http://e-jep.org
presents additional theoretical and empirical discussion of false recall in our data.

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election

227

After weighting for national representativeness, 15 percent of survey respondents recalled seeing the Fake stories, and 8 percent both recalled seeing the story
and said they believed it.5 By comparison, about 14 percent of people report seeing
the placebo stories, and about 8 percent report seeing and believing them. We estimate that the average Fake headline was 1.2 percentage points more likely to be
seen and recalled than the average Placebo headline, and the 95 percent confidence interval allows us to exclude differences greater than 2.9 percent.
We can use these results to provide a separate estimate of fake news exposure.
The average Fake article that we asked about in the post-election survey was shared
0.386 million times on Facebook. If the average article was seen and recalled by
1.2 percent of American adults, this gives (0.012 recalled exposure)/(0.386 million
shares) ≈ 0.03 chance of a recalled exposure per million Facebook shares. Given
that the Fake articles in our database had 38 million Facebook shares, this implies
that the average adult saw and remembered 0.03/million × 38 million ≈ 1.14 fake
news articles from our fake news database.
All three approaches suggest that election-period fake news exposure was on
the order of one or perhaps several articles read per adult. We emphasize several
important caveats. First, each of these measures excludes some forms of exposure
that could have been influential. All of them exclude stories or sites omitted from
our database. Estimated page visits or impressions exclude cases in which users saw
a story within their Facebook news feed but did not click through to read it. Our
survey-based recall measure excludes stories that users saw but did not remember,
and may be subject to other biases associated with survey-based estimates of media
exposure (Bartels 1993; Prior 2009; Guess 2015).

Who Believes Fake News?
It is both privately and socially valuable when people can infer the true state
of the world. What factors predict the ability to distinguish between real and fake
news? This analysis parallels a literature in political science measuring and interpreting correlates of misinformation, including Lewandowsky, Oberauer, and
Gignac (2013), Malka, Krosnick, and Langer (2009), and Oliver and Wood (2014).
We construct a variable Cia, that takes value 1 if survey respondent i correctly
identifies whether article a is true or false, 0.5 if respondent i is “not sure,” and value
0 otherwise. For example, if headline a is true, then Cia takes value 1 if person i
responded “Yes” to “would your best guess have been that this statement was true?”;
0.5 if person i responded “Not sure”; and 0 if person i responded “No.” We use Cia

5

These shares are broadly consistent with the results of a separate survey conducted by Silverman and
Singer-Vine (2016): for a set of five fake news stories, they find that the share of respondents who have
heard them ranges from 10 to 22 percent and the share who rate them as “very accurate” ranges from
28 to 49 percent.

228

Journal of Economic Perspectives

as the dependent variable and a vector Xi of individual characteristics in a linear
regression:
Cia = α1Xi + α0 + εia.
Table 1 reports results. Column 1 includes only false articles (both Fake and
Placebo), and focuses only on party affiliation; the omitted category is Independents.
In these data, it is indeed true that Republicans were statistically less likely than
Democrats to report that they (correctly) did not believe a false article. Column 2
includes only true articles (both Big True and Small True categories). This suggests
that Republicans are also more likely than Democrats to correctly believe articles
that were true ( p = 0.124). These results suggest that in our data, Republicans were
not generally worse at inference: instead, they tended to be more credulous of both
true and false articles. Of course, it is possible that this is simply an artifact of how
different respondents interpreted the survey design. For example, it could be that
Republicans tended to expect a higher share of true headlines in our survey, and
thus were less discerning.
Another possible explanation is that the differences between parties hide
other factors associated with party affiliation. Columns 3 and 4 test this possibility,
including a vector of additional covariates. The differences between the Democrat
and Republican indicator variables are relatively robust. Column 5 includes all articles, which weights true and false articles by the proportions in our survey sample.
Given that our survey included a large proportion of fake articles that Republicans
were less likely to recognize as false, Democrats are overall more likely to correctly
identify true versus false articles. Three correlations tend to be statistically significant: people who spend more time consuming media, people with higher education,
and older people have more accurate beliefs about news. As with Republicans relative to Democrats, people who report that social media were their most important
sources of election news were more likely both to correctly believe true headlines
and to incorrectly believe false headlines.
The association of education with correct beliefs should be highlighted. Flynn,
Nyhan, and Reifler (2017) argue that education could have opposing effects on
political misperceptions. On the one hand, education should increase people’s
ability to discern fact from fiction. On the other hand, in the presence of motivated
reasoning, education gives people better tools to counterargue against incongruent information. To the extent that the association in our data is causal, it would
reinforce many previous arguments that the social return to education includes
cognitive abilities that better equip citizens to make informed voting decisions. For
example, Adam Smith (1776) wrote, “The more [people] are instructed, the less
liable they are to the delusions of enthusiasm and superstition, which, among ignorant nations, frequently occasion the most dreadful disorders.”
A common finding in the survey literature on rumors, conspiracy theories,
and factual beliefs is that partisan attachment is an important predictor of beliefs
(for example, Oliver and Wood 2014; Uscinski, Klofstad, and Atkinson 2016).

Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

229

Table 1
What Predicts Correct Beliefs about News Headlines?
(1)

(2)

Democrat

0.029
(0.020)

–0.004
(0.023)

Republican

–0.024
(0.024)

0.040
(0.027)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.028
(0.019)

–0.010
(0.021)

0.015
(0.013)

–0.037*
(0.020)

0.021
(0.023)

–0.018
(0.014)

ln(Daily media time)

–0.002
(0.007)

0.042***
(0.008)

0.013***
(0.004)

Social media most
important

–0.066***
(0.025)

0.065***
(0.024)

–0.023
(0.016)

Use social media

0.014
(0.030)

–0.023
(0.038)

0.002
(0.019)

Social media
ideological segregation

–0.027
(0.036)

0.028
(0.046)

–0.008
(0.024)

Education

0.014***
(0.004)

0.004
(0.004)

0.011***
(0.003)

Undecided

–0.011
(0.017)

0.006
(0.022)

–0.005
(0.013)

Age

0.002***
(0.000)

0.000
(0.001)

0.002***
(0.000)

N

12,080

6,040

12,080

6,040

18,120

p-value
(Democrat = Republican)
Articles in sample

0.029

0.124

0.004

0.207

0.035

False

True

False

True

All

Note: This table presents estimates of a regression of a dependent variable measuring correct
beliefs about headlines on individual characteristics. Columns 1 and 3 include only false
headlines, columns 2 and 4 contain only true headlines, and column 5 contains all headlines.
All columns include additional demographic controls: income, race, and gender. “Social media
most important” means social media were the respondent’s most important sources of election
news. “Social media ideological segregation” is the self-reported share (from 0 to 1) of social
media friends that preferred the same presidential candidate. “Undecided” is an indicator
variable for whether the respondent decided which candidate to vote for less than three months
before the election. Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Standard errors
are robust and clustered by survey respondent.
*, **, *** indicate statistically significantly different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent
confidence, respectively.

For example, Republicans are more likely than Democrats to believe that President Obama was born outside the United States, and Democrats are more likely
than Republicans to believe that President Bush was complicit in the 9/11 attacks
(Cassino and Jenkins 2013). Such polarized beliefs are consistent with a Bayesian
framework, where posteriors depend partially on priors, as well as with models of
motivated reasoning (for example, Taber and Lodge 2006, or see the symposium
in the Summer 2016 issue of this journal). Either way, the ability to update one’s
priors in response to factual information is privately and socially valuable in our
model, and polarized views on factual issues can damage society’s ability to come

230

Journal of Economic Perspectives

to agreement on what social problems are important and how to address them
(Sunstein 2001a, b, 2007).
Given this discussion, do we also see polarized beliefs with respect to fake news?
And if so, what factors moderate ideologically aligned inference—that is, what
factors predict a lower probability that a Republican is more likely to believe proTrump news than pro-Clinton news, or that a Democrat is more likely to believe
pro-Clinton than pro-Trump news? To gain insight into this question, we define Bia
as a measure of whether individual i believed article a, taking value 1 if “Yes,” 0.5
if “Not sure,” and 0 if “No.” We also define Di and Ri as Democrat and Republican
indicators, and Ca and Ta as indicators for whether headline a is pro-Clinton or
pro-Trump. We then run the following regression in the sample of Democrats and
Republicans, excluding Independents:
Bia = βDDiCa + βR Ri Ta + γDDi + γRRi + εia.
The first two independent variables are interaction terms; their coefficients βD
and βR measure whether a Democrat is more likely to believe a pro-Clinton headline and whether a Republican is more likely to believe a pro-Trump headline. The
second two independent variables control for how likely Democrats or Republicans
are as a group are to believe all stories. Since headlines are randomly assigned to
respondents, with equal balance of true versus false and pro-Trump versus proClinton, the estimated β parameters will measure ideologically aligned inference
Table 2 presents the results. Column 1 presents estimates of βD and βR. Democrats and Republicans, respectively, are 17.2 and 14.7 percentage points more likely
to believe ideologically aligned articles than they are to believe nonaligned articles.
Column 2 takes an intermediate step, constraining the β coefficients to be the same.
Column 3 then allows β to vary by the same vector of Xi variables as reported in
Table 1, except excluding Di to avoid collinearity. In both columns 1 and 3, any
differences between Democrats and Republicans in the magnitude of ideologically
aligned inference are not statistically significant.
Three variables are strongly correlated with ideologically aligned inference.
First, heavy media consumers are more likely to believe ideologically aligned articles. Second, those with segregated social networks are significantly more likely to
believe ideologically aligned articles, perhaps because they are less likely to receive
disconfirmatory information from their friends. The point estimate implies that a
0.1 (10 percentage point) increase in the share of social media friends that preferred
the same presidential candidate is associated with a 0.0147 (1.47 percentage point)
increase in belief of ideologically aligned headlines relative to ideologically crosscutting headlines. Third, “undecided” adults (those who did not make up their
minds about whom to vote for until less than three months before the election) are
less likely to believe ideologically aligned articles than more decisive voters. This
is consistent with undecided voters having less-strong ideologies in the first place.
Interestingly, social media use and education are not statistically significantly associated with more or less ideologically aligned inference.

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election

231

Table 2
Ideological Alignment and Belief of News Headlines
(1)
Democrat × Pro-Clinton

0.172***
(0.021)

Republican × Pro-Trump

0.147***
(0.023)

Aligned

(2)

0.161***
(0.016)

(3)

0.096
(0.140)

Aligned × Republican

0.000
(0.027)

Aligned × ln(Daily media time)

0.024***
(0.009)

Aligned × Social media most important

–0.031
(0.037)

Aligned × Use social media

–0.068
(0.050)

Aligned × Social media ideological segregation

0.147***
(0.046)

Aligned × Education

–0.004
(0.007)

Aligned × Undecided

–0.099***
(0.030)

Aligned × Age

0.001
(0.001)

N

10,785

10,785

10,785

Notes: This table presents estimates of a regression of a variable measuring belief of news headlines
on the interaction of political party affiliation indicators and pro-Clinton or pro-Trump headline
indicators. The sample includes all news headlines (both true and false) but excludes survey
respondents who are Independents. “Social media most important” means social media were the
respondent’s most important sources of election news. “Social media ideological segregation” is
the self-reported share (from 0 to 1) of social media friends that preferred the same presidential
candidate. “Undecided” is an indicator variable for whether the respondent decided which
candidate to vote for less than three months before the election. Observations are weighted
for national representativeness. Standard errors are robust and clustered by survey respondent.
*, **, ***: statistically significantly different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence,
respectively.

One caveat to these results is that ideologically aligned inference may be exaggerated by respondents’ tendency to answer expressively or to want to “cheerlead”
for their party (Bullock, Gerber, Hill, and Huber 2015; Gerber and Huber 2009;
Prior, Sood, and Khanna 2015). Partisan gaps could be smaller in a survey with
strong incentives for correct answers.

232

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Conclusion
In the aftermath of the 2016 US presidential election, it was alleged that fake
news might have been pivotal in the election of President Trump. We do not provide
an assessment of this claim one way or another.
That said, the new evidence we present clarifies the level of overall exposure
to fake news, and it can give some sense of how persuasive fake news would need
to have been to have been pivotal. We estimate that the average US adult read and
remembered on the order of one or perhaps several fake news articles during the
election period, with higher exposure to pro-Trump articles than pro-Clinton articles. How much this affected the election results depends on the effectiveness of
fake news exposure in changing the way people vote. As one benchmark, Spenkuch
and Toniatti (2016) show that exposing voters to one additional television campaign
ad changes vote shares by approximately 0.02 percentage points. This suggests that
if one fake news article were about as persuasive as one TV campaign ad, the fake
news in our database would have changed vote shares by an amount on the order
of hundredths of a percentage point. This is much smaller than Trump’s margin of
victory in the pivotal states on which the outcome depended.
Of course there are many reasons why a single fake news story could have been
more effective than a television commercial. If it were true that the Pope endorsed
Donald Trump, this fact would be significantly more surprising—and probably
move a rational voter’s beliefs by more as a result—than the information contained
in a typical campaign ad. Moreover, as we emphasize above, there are many ways in
which our estimates could understate true exposure. We only measure the number
of stories read and remembered, and the excluded stories seen on news feeds but
not read, or read but not remembered, could have had a large impact. Our fake
news database is incomplete, and the effect of the stories it omits could also be
significant.
We also note that there are several ways in which this back-of-the-envelope
calculation is conservative, in the sense that it could overstate the importance of
fake news. We consider the number of stories voters read regardless of whether they
believed them. We do not account for diminishing returns, which could reduce
fake news’ effect to the extent that a small number of voters see a large number of
stories. Also, this rough calculation does not explicitly take into account the fact
that a large share of pro-Trump fake news is seen by voters who are already predisposed to vote for Trump—the larger this selective exposure, the smaller the impact
we would expect of fake news on vote shares.
To the extent that fake news imposes social costs, what can and should be done?
In theory, a social planner should want to address the market failures that lead to
distortions, which would take the form of increasing information about the state of
the world and increasing incentives for news consumers to infer the true state of the
world. In practice, social media platforms and advertising networks have faced some
pressure from consumers and civil society to reduce the prevalence of fake news on
their systems. For example, both Facebook and Google are removing fake news sites

Hunt Allcott and Matthew Gentzkow

233

from their advertising platforms on the grounds that they violate policies against
misleading content (Wingfield, Isaac, and Benner 2016). Furthermore, Facebook
has taken steps to identify fake news articles, flag false articles as “disputed by 3rd
party fact-checkers,” show fewer potentially false articles in users’ news feeds, and
help users avoid accidentally sharing false articles by notifying them that a story is
“disputed by 3rd parties” before they share it (Mosseri 2016). In our theoretical
framework, these actions may increase social welfare, but identifying fake news sites
and articles also raises important questions about who becomes the arbiter of truth.

■ We thank David Deming, Brendan Nyhan, Craig Silverman, Aaron Smith, Joe Uscinski,
David Vannette, and many other colleagues for helpful conversations and feedback. We are
grateful to Chuan Yu and Nano Barahona for research assistance, and we thank Stanford
University for financial support. Our survey was determined to be exempt from human
subjects review by the NYU and Stanford Institutional Review Boards.

References
Abramowitz, Alan I., and Kyle L. Saunders.
2008. “Is Polarization a Myth?” Journal of Politics
70(2): 542–55.
American Enterprise Institute. 2013. “Public
Opinion on Conspiracy Theories.” AEI Public
Opinion Study. Compiled by Karlyn Bowman and
Andrew Rugg. November, https://www.aei.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/11/-public-opinionon-conspiracy-theories_181649218739.pdf.
American National Election Studies. 2010.
Times Series Cumulative Data File [dataset].
Produced and distributed by Stanford University
and the University of Michigan. http://www.
electionstudies.org/studypages/anes_timeseries_
cdf/anes_timeseries_cdf.htm.
Bagdikian, Ben H. 1983. The Media Monopoly.
Beacon Press.
Bakshy, Eytan, Solomon Messing, and Lada
A. Adamic. 2015. “Exposure to Ideologically
Diverse News and Opinion on Facebook.” Science
348(6239): 1130–32.
Bartels, Larry M. 1993. “Messages Received:
The Political Impact of Media Exposure.” American
Political Science Review 87(2): 267–85.
Berinsky, Adam J. 2017. “Rumors and Health
Care Reform: Experiments in Political Misinformation.” British Journal of Political Science 47(2):
241–62.
Brayton, Ed. 2016. “Please Stop Sharing Links to
These Sites.” Patheos, September 18. http://www.
patheos.com/blogs/dispatches/2016/09/18/

please-stop-sharing-links-to-these-sites/.
Bullock, John G., Alan S. Gerber, Seth J. Hill,
and Gregory A. Huber. 2015. “Partisan Bias in
Factual Beliefs about Politics.” Quarterly Journal of
Political Science 10(4): 519–78.
BuzzFeed News.No date. “Election Content
Engagement.” [A spreadsheet] https://docs.
google.com/spreadsheets/d/1ysnzawW6pDG
BEqbXqeYuzWa7Rx2mQUip6CXUUUk4jIk/
edit#gid=1756764129.
Cassino, Dan, and Krista Jenkins. 2013.
“Conspiracy Theories Prosper: 25% of Americans
Are ‘Truthers.’” Fairleigh Dickinson University’s
Public Mind Poll. January 17. http://publicmind.
fdu.edu/2013/outthere.
Chapman University. 2016. “What Aren’t They
Telling Us?” Chapman University Survey of American Fears. October 11. https://blogs.chapman.
edu/wilkinson/2016/10/11/what-arent-theytelling-us/.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow.
2010. “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence.” Annual
Review of Economics 2: 643–69.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. 2007.
“The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1187–1234.
Dewey, Caitlin. 2014. “This Is Not an Interview
with Banksy.” Washington Post, October 22. https://
www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/
wp/2014/10/21/this-is-not-an-interview-withbanksy/?tid=a_inl&utm_term=.8a9 5d83438e9.

234

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Dewey, Caitlin. 2016. “Facebook Fake-News
Writer: ‘I Think Donald Trump is in the White
House because of Me.’” Washington Post,
November, 17. https://www.washingtonpost.
com/news/the-intersect/wp/2016/11/17/
facebook-fake-news-writer-i-think-donald-trump-isin-the-white-house-because-of-me/.
DiFonzo, Nicholas, and Prashant Bordia.
2007. Rumor Psychology: Social and Organizational
Approaches. American Psychological Association.
Enikolopov, Ruben, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2011. “Media and Political
Persuasion: Evidence from Russia.” American
Economic Review 101(7): 3253–85.
Eventbrite. 2012. “Social Commerce: A Global
Look at the Numbers.” October 23. https://www.
eventbrite.com/blog/ds00-social-commerce-aglobal-look-at-the-numbers/.
Fiorina, Morris P., and Samuel J. Abrams. 2008.
“Political Polarization in the American Public.”
Annual Review of Political Science 11: 563–88.
Flaxman, Seth, Sharad Goel, and Justin M. Rao.
2016. “Filter Bubbles, Echo Chambers, and Online
News Consumption.” Public Opinion Quarterly
80(1): 298–320.
Flynn, D. J., Brendan Nyhan, and Jason Reifler.
2017. “The Nature and Origins of Misperceptions:
Understanding False and Unsupported Beliefs
about Politics.” Advances in Political Psychology
38(S1): 127–50.
Friggeri, Adrien, Lada Adamic, Dean Eckles,
and Justin Cheng. 2014. “Rumor Cascades.” Eighth
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro.
2006. “Media Bias and Reputation.” Journal of
Political Economy 114(2): 280–316.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2011.
“Ideological Segregation Online and Offline.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1799–1839.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and
Daniel F. Stone. 2016. “Media Bias in the Marketplace: Theory.” Chap. 14 in Handbook of Media
Economics, vol. 1B, edited by Simon Anderson, Joel
Waldofgel, and David Stromberg.
Gerber, Alan S., James G. Gimpel, Donald P.
Green, and Daron R. Shaw. 2011. “How Large and
Long-lasting are the Persuasive Effects of Televised
Campaign Ads? Results from a Randomized Field
Experiment.” American Political Science Review
105(1): 135–150.
Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green. 2000.
“The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and
Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment.”
American Political Science Review 94(3): 653–63.
Gerber, Alan S., and Gregory A. Huber. 2009.
“Partisanship and Economic Behavior: Do Partisan

Differences in Economic Forecasts Predict Real
Economic Behavior?” American Political Science
Review 103(3): 407–26.
Gottfried, Jeffrey, and Elisa Shearer. 2016.
“News Use across Social Media Platforms 2016.”
Pew Research Center, May 26. http://www.
journalism.org/2016/05/26/news-use-acrosssocial-media-platforms-2016.
Guess, Andrew M. 2015. “Measure for Measure:
An Experimental Test of Online Political Media
Exposure.” Political Analysis 23(1): 59–75.
Huber, Gregory A., and Kevin Arceneaux. 2007.
“Identifying the Persuasive Effects of Presidential
Advertising.” American Journal of Political Science
51(4): 957–77.
Kaplan, Richard L. 2002. Politics and the
American Press: The Rise of Objectivity, 1865–1920.
Cambridge University Press.
Keeley, Brian L. 1999. “Of Conspiracy Theories.” Journal of Philosophy 96(3): 109–26.
Lang, Kurt, and Gladys Engel Lang. 2002. Television and Politics. Transaction Publishers.
Lelkes, Yphtach. 2016. “Mass Polarization:
Manifestations and Measurements.” Public Opinion
Quarterly 80(S1): 392–410.
Lewandowsky, Stephan, Gilles E. Gignac, and
Klaus Oberauer. 2013. “The Role of Conspiracist
Ideation and Worldviews in Predicting Rejection of
Science.” PloS One 8(10): e75637.
Malka, Ariel, Jon A. Krosnick, and Gary
Langer. 2009. “The Association of Knowledge with
Concern about Global Warming: Trusted Information Sources Shape Public Thinking.” Risk Analysis
29(5): 633–47.
Martin, Gregory J., and Ali Yurukoglu. 2014.
“Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization.”
NBER Working Paper 20798.
McClosky, Herbert, and Dennis Chong. 1985.
“Similarities and Differences between Left-Wing
and Right-Wing Radicals.” British Journal of Political
Science 15(3): 329–63.
Mosseri Adam. 2016. “News Feed FYI:
Addressing Hoaxes and Fake News.” Newsroom,
Facebook, December 15. http://newsroom.fb.
com/news/2016/12/news-feed-fyi-addressinghoaxes-and-fake-news/.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer.
2005. “The Market for News.” American Economic
Review 95(4): 1031–53.
Napoli, Philip M. 2014. “Measuring Media
Impact: An Overview of the Field.” Norman Lear
Center Media Impact Project. https://learcenter.
org/pdf/measuringmedia.pdf.
Novak, Jessica. No date. “Quantifying Virality:
The Visits to Share Ratio.” http://intelligence.r29.
com/post/105605860880/quantifying-virality-thevisits-to-shares-ratio.

Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election

Nyhan, Brendan, Jason Reifler, Sean Richey,
and Gary L. Freed. 2014. “Effective Messages in
Vaccine Promotion: A Randomized Trial.” Pediatrics 133(4): 835–42.
Nyhan, Brendan, Jason Reifler, and Peter A.
Ubel. 2013. “The Hazards of Correcting Myths
about Health Care Reform.” Medical Care 51(2):
127–32.
Oliver, J. Eric, and Thomas J. Wood. 2014.
“Conspiracy Theories and the Paranoid Style(s) of
Mass Opinion.” American Journal of Political Science
58(4): 952–66.
Pariser, Eli. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the
Internet Is Hiding from You. Penguin UK.
Parkinson, Hannah Jane. 2016. “Click and Elect:
How Fake News Helped Donald Trump Win a Real
Election.” Guardian, November 14.
PolitiFact. N
 o date. http://www.politifact.com/
truth-o-meter/elections/2016/president-unitedstates/.
Price, Vincent, and John Zaller. 1993. “Who
Gets the News? Alternative Measures of News
Reception and Their Implications for Research.”
Public Opinion Quarterly 57(2): 133–64.
Prior, Markus. 2009. “The Immensely Inflated
News Audience: Assessing Bias in Self-Reported
News Exposure.” Public Opinion Quarterly 73(1):
130–43.
Prior, Markus. 2013. “Media and Political
Polarization.” Annual Review of Political Science 16:
101–27.
Prior, Markus, Gaurav Sood, and Kabir Khanna.
2015. “You Cannot Be Serious: The Impact of
Accuracy Incentives on Partisan Bias in Reports
of Economic Perceptions.” Quarterly Journal of
Political Science 10(4): 489–518.
Read, Max. 2016. “Donald Trump Won because
of Facebook.” New York Magazine, November 9.
Silverman, Craig. 2016. “This Analysis Shows
how Fake Election News Stories Outperformed
Real News on Facebook.” BuzzFeed News, November
16.
Silverman, Craig and Jeremy Singer-Vine. 2016.
“Most Americans Who See Fake News Believe It,
New Survey Says.” BuzzFeed News, December 6.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations.
London: W. Strahan.
Spenkuch, Jörg L., and David Toniatti. 2016.
“Political Advertising and Election Outcomes.”
CESifo Working Paper Series 5780.
Subramanian, Samanth. 2017. “Inside the Macedonian Fake-News Complex, Wired, February 15.

235

Sunstein, Cass R. 2001a. Echo Chambers: Bush v.
Gore, Impeachment, and Beyond. Princeton University Press.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2001b. Republic.com. Princeton University Press.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2007. Republic.com 2.0. Princeton University Press.
Swift, Art. 2016. “Americans’ Trust in Mass
Media Sinks to New Low.” Gallup, September 14.
http://www.gallup.com/poll/195542/americanstrust-mass-media-sinks-new-low.aspx.
Sydell, Laura. 2016. “We Tracked Down
a Fake-News Creator in the Suburbs. Here’s
What We Learned.” National Public Radio,
November 23. http://www.npr.org/sections/
alltechconsidered/2016/11/23/503146770/
npr-finds-the-head-of-a-covert-fake-news-operationin-the-suburbs.
Taber, Charles S., and Milton Lodge. 2006.
“Motivated Skepticism in the Evaluation of Political
Beliefs.” American Journal of Political Science 50(3):
755–69.
Townsend, Tess. 2016. “Meet the Romanian
Trump Fan behind a Major Fake News Site.” Inc.
http://www. inc.com/tess-townsend/ending-fedtrump-facebook.html.
Uscinski, Joseph E., Casey Klofstad, and
Matthew D. Atkinson. 2016. “What Drives Conspiratorial Beliefs? The Role of Informational Cues
and Predispositions.” Political Research Quarterly
69(1): 57–71.
Wingfield, Nick, Mike Isaac, and Katie Benner.
2016.” Google and Facebook Take Aim at Fake
News Sites.” New York Times, November 14.
Yeager, David S., Jon A. Krosnick, LinChiat
Chang, Harold S. Javitz, Matthew S. Levendusky,
Alberto Simpser, and Rui Wang. 2011. “Comparing
the Accuracy of RDD Telephone Surveys and
Internet Surveys Conducted with Probability and
Non-Probability Samples.” Public Opinion Quarterly
75(4): 709–47.
Zhao, Junzhou, Pinghui Wang, Jing Tao,
Xiaobo Ma, and Xiaohong Guan. 2013. “A
Peep on the Interplays between Online
Video Websites and Online Social Networks.”
ariXiv:1305.4018.
Zimdars, Melissa. 2016. “False, Misleading,
Clickbait-y, and Satirical ‘News’ Sources.”
http://d279m997dpfwgl.cloudfront.net/
wp/2016/11/Resource-False-Misleading-Clickbaity-and-Satirical-%E2%80%9CNews%E2%80%9DSources-1.pdf.

236

Journal of Economic Perspectives

This article has been cited by:
1. Björn Bebensee, Nagmat Nazarov, Byoung-Tak Zhang. 2021. Leveraging node neighborhoods and
egograph topology for better bot detection in social graphs. Social Network Analysis and Mining 11:1. .
[Crossref]
2. Bin Guo, Yasan Ding, Yueheng Sun, Shuai Ma, Ke Li, Zhiwen Yu. 2021. The mass, fake news, and
cognition security. Frontiers of Computer Science 15:3. . [Crossref]
3. Saqib Hakak, Mamoun Alazab, Suleman Khan, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, Praveen Kumar Reddy
Maddikunta, Wazir Zada Khan. 2021. An ensemble machine learning approach through effective
feature extraction to classify fake news. Future Generation Computer Systems 117, 47-58. [Crossref]
4. Qiuyi Kong, Kelly-Yee Lai-Ku, Liping Deng, Apple-Chung Yan-Au. 2021. Motivation and perception
of Hong Kong university students about social media news. Comunicar 29:67. . [Crossref]
5. Byron Reeves, Nilam Ram, Thomas N. Robinson, James J. Cummings, C. Lee Giles, Jennifer Pan,
Agnese Chiatti, Mj Cho, Katie Roehrick, Xiao Yang, Anupriya Gagneja, Miriam Brinberg, Daniel
Muise, Yingdan Lu, Mufan Luo, Andrew Fitzgerald, Leo Yeykelis. 2021. Screenomics : A Framework
to Capture and Analyze Personal Life Experiences and the Ways that Technology Shapes Them.
Human–Computer Interaction 36:2, 150-201. [Crossref]
6. Hikmat Ullah Khan, Shumaila Nasir, Kishwar Nasim, Danial Shabbir, Ahsan Mahmood. 2021.
Twitter trends: A ranking algorithm analysis on real time data. Expert Systems with Applications 164,
113990. [Crossref]
7. Sutirtha Chatterjee, Suranjan Chakraborty, H. Kevin Fulk, Suprateek Sarker. 2021. Building a
compassionate workplace using information technology: Considerations for information systems
research. International Journal of Information Management 56, 102261. [Crossref]
8. Peter Reinhard Hansen, Matthias Schmidtblaicher. 2021. A Dynamic Model of Vaccine Compliance:
How Fake News Undermined the Danish HPV Vaccine Program. Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics 39:1, 259-271. [Crossref]
9. Deependra Bhushan, Chetan Agrawal, Himanshu Yadav. Fake News Detection: Tools, Techniques,
and Methodologies 347-357. [Crossref]
10. Pawan Kumar Verma, Prateek Agrawal. Study and Detection of Fake News: P2C2-Based Machine
Learning Approach 261-278. [Crossref]
11. Mohammad Ahsan, T. P. Sharma. Influence of Internal and External Sources on Information
Diffusion at Twitter 430-436. [Crossref]
12. Hyung Min Kim, Soheil Sabri, Anthony Kent. Smart cities as a platform for technological and social
innovation in productivity, sustainability, and livability: A conceptual framework 9-28. [Crossref]
13. Fernando Filgueiras, Virgílio Almeida. Digital Technologies for Governance 43-73. [Crossref]
14. Esra Bozkanat. Detecting Fake News on Social Media 49-67. [Crossref]
15. Alicia Fjällhed. Managing Disinformation Through Public Diplomacy 227-253. [Crossref]
16. Edson C. Tandoc. Tools of Disinformation: How Fake News Gets to Deceive 35-46. [Crossref]
17. Robert Paluch, Łukasz Gajewski, Krzysztof Suchecki, Bolesław Szymański, Janusz A. Hołyst.
Enhancing Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Infection Source Localization 21-41. [Crossref]
18. Shaun Ruysenaar. Thinking Critically About the Fourth Industrial Revolution as a Wicked Problem
1-26. [Crossref]
19. Ramanpreet Kaur, Tomaž Klobučar, Dušan Gabrijelčič. Privacy in Online Social Networks 567-598.
[Crossref]

20. Joshua Ojo Nehinbe. Statistical Methods for Conducting the Ontology and Classifications of Fake
News on Social Media 632-651. [Crossref]
21. Chris Edmond, Yang K. Lu. 2021. Creating confusion. Journal of Economic Theory 191, 105145.
[Crossref]
22. Uma Maheswari Sadasivam, Nitin Ganesan. Detecting Fake News Using Deep Learning and NLP
117-133. [Crossref]
23. Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman, Prithula Prosun Puja. Storytelling and the Rhetoric of Rumor in Social Media
40-62. [Crossref]
24. Stephen Jeffares. The Management of Social Media in Frontline Public Service 151-182. [Crossref]
25. Roberto Di Pietro, Simone Raponi, Maurantonio Caprolu, Stefano Cresci. Information Disorder 7-64.
[Crossref]
26. Mark Chong, Murphy Choy. An Empirically Supported Taxonomy of Misinformation 1-24.
[Crossref]
27. Thomas Dale. The Fundamental Roles of Technology in the Spread of Fake News 67-82. [Crossref]
28. Rosanna E. Guadagno, Karen Guttieri. Fake News and Information Warfare 218-242. [Crossref]
29. Norbert Merkovity. Political Campaign Communication in the Information Age 331-345. [Crossref]
30. Umaru A. Pate, Adamkolo Mohammed Ibrahim. Fake News, Hate Speech and Nigeria's Struggle for
Democratic Consolidation 387-410. [Crossref]
31. Antonio Badia. An Overview (and Criticism) of Methods to Detect Fake Content Online 412-421.
[Crossref]
32. Mehmet Fatih Çömlekçi. Combating Fake News Online 466-482. [Crossref]
33. Stephanie Jean Tsang. News Credibility and Media Literacy in the Digital Age 544-564. [Crossref]
34. Anjum Nazir, Rizwan Ahmed Khan. Network Intrusion Detection: Taxonomy and Machine Learning
Applications 3-28. [Crossref]
35. Vivek K. Singh, Isha Ghosh, Darshan Sonagara. 2021. Detecting fake news stories via multimodal
analysis. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 72:1, 3-17. [Crossref]
36. Birgit Stark, Melanie Magin, Stefan Geiß. Meinungsbildung in und mit sozialen Medien 1-19.
[Crossref]
37. Cecilia Toccaceli, Letizia Milli, Giulio Rossetti. Opinion Dynamic Modeling of Fake News Perception
370-381. [Crossref]
38. Ardian Maulana, Hokky Situngkir. Media Partisanship During Election: Indonesian Cases 651-659.
[Crossref]
39. Kristina Machova, Ivan Srba, Martin Sarnovský, Ján Paralič, Viera Maslej Kresnakova, Andrea
Hrckova, Michal Kompan, Marian Simko, Radoslav Blaho, Daniela Chuda, Maria Bielikova, Pavol
Navrat. Addressing False Information and Abusive Language in Digital Space Using Intelligent
Approaches 3-32. [Crossref]
40. Giandomenico Di Domenico, Jason Sit, Alessio Ishizaka, Daniel Nunan. 2021. Fake news, social media
and marketing: A systematic review. Journal of Business Research 124, 329-341. [Crossref]
41. Adem BÖLÜKBAŞI, Mariam MOHAMMED. 2020. Siber Uzay Çağında Demokrasi ve Yalan
Haberler. Sosyal ve Kültürel Araştırmalar Dergisi (SKAD) 6:13, 1-38. [Crossref]
42. Simge Andı, Jesper Akesson. 2020. Nudging Away False News: Evidence from a Social Norms
Experiment. Digital Journalism 125, 1-21. [Crossref]

43. Marko Selakovic, Anna Tarabasz, Monica Gallant. 2020. Typology of Business-Related Fake News
Online: A Literature Review. GATR Journal of Management and Marketing Review 5:4, 234-243.
[Crossref]
44. Amalia Juneström. 2020. An emerging genre of contemporary fact-checking. Journal of Documentation
ahead-of-print:ahead-of-print. . [Crossref]

45. Neri Marsili. 2020. Lying, speech acts, and commitment. Synthese 94. . [Crossref]
46. Lateef Adeshina Ayinde, Ejiro Daniel Keriafe, Fatima Jibril Abduldayan. 2020. Information needs and
sources of electorates in Nigeria. Library Management ahead-of-print:ahead-of-print. . [Crossref]
47. Andrzej Kawiak, Grzegorz M. Wojcik, Piotr Schneider, Lukasz Kwasniewicz, Adam Wierzbicki. 2020.
Whom to Believe? Understanding and Modeling Brain Activity in Source Credibility Evaluation.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 14. . [Crossref]
48. Elaine Javorski, Janine Bargas. 2020. A informação sobre a Covid-19 nos desertos de notícias: a
relevância do jornalismo interior do Pará. Liinc em Revista 16:2, e5339. [Crossref]
49. Anis Najar, Emmanuelle Bonnet, Bahador Bahrami, Stefano Palminteri. 2020. The actions of others
act as a pseudo-reward to drive imitation in the context of social reinforcement learning. PLOS Biology
18:12, e3001028. [Crossref]
50. Eileen Culloty, Jane Suiter. Audiences 49-65. [Crossref]
51. Grzegorz Urbanek. 2020. Fake News Related to the Coronavirus. Case Study. Security Dimensions
34:34, 61-75. [Crossref]
52. Javier Serrano-Puche, Carmen Beatriz Fernández, Jordi Rodríguez Virgili. Disinformation and news
consumption in a polarized society 161-178. [Crossref]
53. Francesco Pierri, Carlo Piccardi, Stefano Ceri. 2020. Topology comparison of Twitter diffusion
networks effectively reveals misleading information. Scientific Reports 10:1. . [Crossref]
54. Joseph H. Tien, Marisa C. Eisenberg, Sarah T. Cherng, Mason A. Porter. 2020. Online reactions to
the 2017 ‘Unite the right’ rally in Charlottesville: measuring polarization in Twitter networks using
media followership. Applied Network Science 5:1. . [Crossref]
55. Andrew P. Weiss, Ahmed Alwan, Eric P. Garcia, Julieta Garcia. 2020. Surveying fake news: Assessing
university faculty’s fragmented definition of fake news and its impact on teaching critical thinking.
International Journal for Educational Integrity 16:1. . [Crossref]
56. Manon Berriche, Sacha Altay. 2020. Internet users engage more with phatic posts than with health
misinformation on Facebook. Palgrave Communications 6:1. . [Crossref]
57. Jesús San Martín, Fátima Drubi, Daniel Rodríguez Pérez. 2020. Uncritical polarized groups: The
impact of spreading fake news as fact in social networks. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation
178, 192-206. [Crossref]
58. Stefano Guarino, Noemi Trino, Alessandro Celestini, Alessandro Chessa, Gianni Riotta. 2020.
Characterizing networks of propaganda on twitter: a case study. Applied Network Science 5:1. .
[Crossref]
59. Cameron Martel, Gordon Pennycook, David G. Rand. 2020. Reliance on emotion promotes belief in
fake news. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications 5:1. . [Crossref]
60. Kris Hartley, Minh Khuong Vu. 2020. Fighting fake news in the COVID-19 era: policy insights from
an equilibrium model. Policy Sciences 53:4, 735-758. [Crossref]
61. Mitchell Church, Ravi Thambusamy, Hamid Nemati. 2020. User misrepresentation in online
social networks: how competition and altruism impact online disclosure behaviours. Behaviour &
Information Technology 39:12, 1320-1340. [Crossref]

62. Janet Z. Yang, Jun Zhuang. 2020. Information Seeking and Information Sharing Related to Hurricane
Harvey. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 97:4, 1054-1079. [Crossref]
63. Katherine Clayton, Spencer Blair, Jonathan A. Busam, Samuel Forstner, John Glance, Guy Green,
Anna Kawata, Akhila Kovvuri, Jonathan Martin, Evan Morgan, Morgan Sandhu, Rachel Sang, Rachel
Scholz-Bright, Austin T. Welch, Andrew G. Wolff, Amanda Zhou, Brendan Nyhan. 2020. Real
Solutions for Fake News? Measuring the Effectiveness of General Warnings and Fact-Check Tags in
Reducing Belief in False Stories on Social Media. Political Behavior 42:4, 1073-1095. [Crossref]
64. Suvodeep Mazumdar, Dhavalkumar Thakker. 2020. Citizen Science on Twitter: Using Data Analytics
to Understand Conversations and Networks. Future Internet 12:12, 210. [Crossref]
65. Francesco Pierri, Carlo Piccardi, Stefano Ceri. 2020. A multi-layer approach to disinformation
detection in US and Italian news spreading on Twitter. EPJ Data Science 9:1. . [Crossref]
66. David L. Dickinson. 2020. Deliberation Enhances the Confirmation Bias in Politics. Games 11:4, 57.
[Crossref]
67. Cornelia Sindermann, Andrew Cooper, Christian Montag. 2020. A short review on susceptibility to
falling for fake political news. Current Opinion in Psychology 36, 44-48. [Crossref]
68. Xin Wang, Antonio D. Sirianni, Shaoting Tang, Zhiming Zheng, Feng Fu. 2020. Public Discourse and
Social Network Echo Chambers Driven by Socio-Cognitive Biases. Physical Review X 10:4. . [Crossref]
69. João Victor de Souza, Jorão Gomes, Fernando Marques de Souza Filho, Alessandreia Marta de Oliveira
Julio, Jairo Francisco de Souza. 2020. A systematic mapping on automatic classification of fake news
in social media. Social Network Analysis and Mining 10:1. . [Crossref]
70. Tomer Tuchner, Gail Gilboa-Freedman. 2020. Bullshit in a network structure: the two-sided
influence of self-generated signals. Social Network Analysis and Mining 10:1. . [Crossref]
71. Hanif Emamgholizadeh, Milad Nourizade, Mir Saman Tajbakhsh, Mahdieh Hashminezhad, Farzaneh
Nasr Esfahani. 2020. A framework for quantifying controversy of social network debates using
attributed networks: biased random walk (BRW). Social Network Analysis and Mining 10:1. .
[Crossref]
72. Andreas Kollias, Fani Kountouri. 2020. Tweets That Matter: Reconsidering Journalistic Sourcing
and Framing Processes in the Context of the #Grexit Debate. Journalism and Media 1:1, 122-144.
[Crossref]
73. Jiangfeng Zeng, Yin Zhang, Xiao Ma. 2020. Fake news detection for epidemic emergencies via deep
correlations between text and images. Sustainable Cities and Society 102652. [Crossref]
74. Ruben Tolosana, Ruben Vera-Rodriguez, Julian Fierrez, Aythami Morales, Javier Ortega-Garcia. 2020.
Deepfakes and beyond: A Survey of face manipulation and fake detection. Information Fusion 64,
131-148. [Crossref]
75. Roger D. Magarey, Christina M. Trexler. 2020. Information: a missing component in understanding
and mitigating social epidemics. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 7:1. . [Crossref]
76. Beth St. Jean, Paul T. Jaeger, Gagan Jindal, Yuting Liao. Introduction: Libraries and Librarians as
Agents of Health Information Justice 3-18. [Crossref]
77. Khudejah Ali, Khawaja Zain-ul-abdin. 2020. Post-truth propaganda: heuristic processing of political
fake news on Facebook during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Journal of Applied Communication
Research 4, 1-20. [Crossref]
78. Carola Binder. 2020. Presidential antagonism and central bank credibility. Economics & Politics 186. .
[Crossref]
79. Cynthia Peacock, Jennifer Hoewe, Elliot Panek, G. Paul Willis. 2020. Hyperpartisan News Use:
Relationships with Partisanship and Cognitive and Affective Involvement. Mass Communication and
Society 3, 1-23. [Crossref]

80. Dino Villegas. Political Netnography 100-115. [Crossref]
81. Václav Štětka, Jaromír Mazák, Lenka Vochocová. 2020. “Nobody Tells us What to Write about”: the
Disinformation Media Ecosystem and Its Consumers in the Czech Republic. Javnost - The Public 11,
1-20. [Crossref]
82. Samuel Kai Wah Chu, Runbin Xie, Yanshu Wang. 2020. Cross-Language Fake News Detection. Data
and Information Management 5:1, 100-109. [Crossref]
83. Paul C. Bauer, Bernhard Clemm von Hohenberg. 2020. Believing and Sharing Information by Fake
Sources: An Experiment. Political Communication 50, 1-25. [Crossref]
84. Luigi Curini, Eugenio Pizzimenti. Searching for a Unicorn 77-91. [Crossref]
85. Flavio Carvalho, Helder Yukio Okuno, Lais Baroni, Gustavo Guedes. A Brazilian Portuguese Moral
Foundations Dictionary for Fake News classification 1-5. [Crossref]
86. Sofia Rüdiger, Daria Dayter. Introduction. The expanding landscape of corpus-based studies of social
media language 1-12. [Crossref]
87. Bartosz Wilczek. 2020. Misinformation and herd behavior in media markets: A cross-national
investigation of how tabloids’ attention to misinformation drives broadsheets’ attention to
misinformation in political and business journalism. PLOS ONE 15:11, e0241389. [Crossref]
88. Daria Gritsenko, Matthew Wood. 2020. Algorithmic governance: A modes of governance approach.
Regulation & Governance 16. . [Crossref]
89. Andrew Duffy, Edson Tandoc, Rich Ling. 2020. Too good to be true, too good not to share: the
social utility of fake news. Information, Communication & Society 23:13, 1965-1979. [Crossref]
90. João Pedro Baptista, Anabela Gradim. 2020. Online disinformation on Facebook: the spread of
fake news during the Portuguese 2019 election. Journal of Contemporary European Studies 69, 1-16.
[Crossref]
91. Debra S. Dwyer, Rachel Kreier, Maria X. Sanmartin. 2020. Technology Use: Too Much of a Good
Thing?. Atlantic Economic Journal 110. . [Crossref]
92. Rebecca Ping Yu. 2020. How Types of Facebook Users Approach News Verification in the Mobile
Media Age: Insights from the Dual-Information-Processing Model. Mass Communication and Society
65, 1-26. [Crossref]
93. Ebuka Elias Igwebuike, Lily Chimuanya. 2020. Legitimating falsehood in social media: A discourse
analysis of political fake news. Discourse & Communication 10, 175048132096165. [Crossref]
94. Evangelos Pournaras. 2020. Proof of witness presence: Blockchain consensus for augmented democracy
in smart cities. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 145, 160-175. [Crossref]
95. Pedro Henrique Arruda Faustini, Thiago Ferreira Covões. 2020. Fake news detection in multiple
platforms and languages. Expert Systems with Applications 158, 113503. [Crossref]
96. David Camacho, Ángel Panizo-LLedot, Gema Bello-Orgaz, Antonio Gonzalez-Pardo, Erik Cambria.
2020. The four dimensions of social network analysis: An overview of research methods, applications,
and software tools. Information Fusion 63, 88-120. [Crossref]
97. Leonardo Bursztyn, Georgy Egorov, Stefano Fiorin. 2020. From Extreme to Mainstream: The
Erosion of Social Norms. American Economic Review 110:11, 3522-3548. [Abstract] [View PDF
article] [PDF with links]
98. Zhaomeng Niu, Lun Hu, David C. Jeong, Jared Brickman, Jerod L. Stapleton. 2020. An Experimental
Investigation into Promoting Mental Health Service Use on Social Media: Effects of Source and
Comments. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17:21, 7898. [Crossref]

99. Qian Chen, Gautam Srivastava, Reza M. Parizi, Moayad Aloqaily, Ismaeel Al Ridhawi. 2020. An
incentive-aware blockchain-based solution for internet of fake media things. Information Processing &
Management 57:6, 102370. [Crossref]
100. Hyungjin Gill, Hernando Rojas. 2020. Chatting in a mobile chamber: effects of instant messenger use
on tolerance toward political misinformation among South Koreans. Asian Journal of Communication
30:6, 470-493. [Crossref]
101. Argyro Elisavet Manoli, Comille Bandura. 2020. Perceptions of the role of traditional and social media
in communicating corruption. Sport Management Review . [Crossref]
102. Dwayne Winseck. 2020. Vampire squids, ‘the broken internet’ and platform regulation. Journal of
Digital Media & Policy 11:3, 241-282. [Crossref]
103. Javier Rivas, James Rockey. 2020. Expressive voting with booing and cheering: Evidence from Britain.
European Journal of Political Economy 101956. [Crossref]
104. Frank Calio, Lena Nadarevic, Jochen Musch. 2020. How explicit warnings reduce the truth effect: A
multinomial modeling approach. Acta Psychologica 211, 103185. [Crossref]
105. Adrian M. P. Braşoveanu, Răzvan Andonie. 2020. Integrating Machine Learning Techniques in
Semantic Fake News Detection. Neural Processing Letters 8. . [Crossref]
106. Jane Stephens (Fynes-Clinton), Rosanna Natoli, Michele Gilchrist. 2020. Too close for
comfort: journalists’ ethical challenges in regional Australia. Media International Australia 37,
1329878X2096746. [Crossref]
107. Anthony P. Young, Sagar Joglekar, Gioia Boschi, Nishanth Sastry. 2020. Ranking comment sorting
policies in online debates. Argument & Computation 31, 1-21. [Crossref]
108. Hamid Keshavarz. 2020. Evaluating Credibility of Social Media Information: Current Challenges,
Research Directions and Practical Criteria. Information Discovery and Delivery ahead-of-print:aheadof-print. . [Crossref]
109. Chen Luo, Jia Shang, Yuchun Zhu. 2020. Internet as a context: Exploring its impacts on scientific
optimism in China. Information Development 79, 026666692096563. [Crossref]
110. Sulaiman A. Osho. Fake News as Aberration in Journalism Practice: Examining Truth and Facts as
Basis of Fourth Estate of the Realm . [Crossref]
111. Lesley S. J. Farmer. Introduction 1-7. [Crossref]
112. David S. Morris, Jonathan S. Morris, Peter L. Francia. 2020. A fake news inoculation? Fact checkers,
partisan identification, and the power of misinformation. Politics, Groups, and Identities 8:5, 986-1005.
[Crossref]
113. Simge Andı, S. Erdem Aytaç, Ali Çarkoğlu. 2020. Internet and social media use and political
knowledge: Evidence from Turkey. Mediterranean Politics 25:5, 579-599. [Crossref]
114. Iftikhar Ahmad, Muhammad Yousaf, Suhail Yousaf, Muhammad Ovais Ahmad. 2020. Fake News
Detection Using Machine Learning Ensemble Methods. Complexity 2020, 1-11. [Crossref]
115. Emma Ricknell. 2020. Freedom of Expression and Alternatives for Internet Governance: Prospects
and Pitfalls. Media and Communication 8:4, 110-120. [Crossref]
116. Antonis Kalogeropoulos. 2020. Who shares news on mobile messaging applications, why and in what
ways? A cross-national analysis. Mobile Media & Communication 55, 205015792095844. [Crossref]
117. Jan Kirchner, Christian Reuter. 2020. Countering Fake News. Proceedings of the ACM on HumanComputer Interaction 4:CSCW2, 1-27. [Crossref]
118. Zazli Lily Wisker. 2020. The effect of fake news in marketing halal food: a moderating role of
religiosity. Journal of Islamic Marketing ahead-of-print:ahead-of-print. . [Crossref]

119. Piotr Kłodkowski, Anna Siewierska-Chmaj. 2020. O koncepcji ideologicznej kontrnarracji wobec
przesłania fundamentalizmu islamskiego. Analiza wybranych przykładów radykalizacji i deradykalizacji
w Europie, Azji Południowej i na Bliskim Wschodzie. Sprawy Międzynarodowe 72:1, 219-239.
[Crossref]
120. Andrei Botez, Joel Hietanen, Henrikki Tikkanen. 2020. Mapping the absence: a theological critique
of posthumanist influences in marketing and consumer research. Journal of Marketing Management
36:15-16, 1391-1416. [Crossref]
121. Jeffrey A. Greene, Dana Z. Copeland, Victor M. Deekens. 2020. A Model of Technology Incidental
Learning Effects. Educational Psychology Review 4. . [Crossref]
122. Vikram R. Bhargava, Manuel Velasquez. 2020. Ethics of the Attention Economy: The Problem of
Social Media Addiction. Business Ethics Quarterly 9, 1-39. [Crossref]
123. Lennon Y. C. Chang, Souvik Mukherjee, Nicholas Coppel. 2020. We Are All Victims: Questionable
Content and Collective Victimisation in the Digital Age. Asian Journal of Criminology 31. . [Crossref]
124. Niels Nagelhus Schia, Lars Gjesvik. 2020. Hacking democracy: managing influence campaigns and
disinformation in the digital age. Journal of Cyber Policy 96, 1-16. [Crossref]
125. Mary M. Medlin, Donald F. Sacco, Mitch Brown. 2020. Political Orientation and Belief in Science in
a U.S. College Sample. Psychological Reports 123:5, 1688-1702. [Crossref]
126. Julia Cagé, Nicolas Hervé, Marie-Luce Viaud. 2020. The Production of Information in an Online
World. The Review of Economic Studies 87:5, 2126-2164. [Crossref]
127. Cosmin-Octavian Cepoi. 2020. Asymmetric dependence between stock market returns and news
during COVID-19 financial turmoil. Finance Research Letters 36, 101658. [Crossref]
128. Jane Suiter, Richard Fletcher. 2020. Polarization and partisanship: Key drivers of distrust in media
old and new?. European Journal of Communication 35:5, 484-501. [Crossref]
129. Brian Collins, Jose Marichal, Richard Neve. 2020. The social media commons: Public sphere,
agonism, and algorithmic obligation. Journal of Information Technology & Politics 17:4, 409-425.
[Crossref]
130. Jon Roozenbeek, Claudia R. Schneider, Sarah Dryhurst, John Kerr, Alexandra L. J. Freeman, Gabriel
Recchia, Anne Marthe van der Bles, Sander van der Linden. 2020. Susceptibility to misinformation
about COVID-19 around the world. Royal Society Open Science 7:10, 201199. [Crossref]
131. Carola Binder. 2020. Coronavirus Fears and Macroeconomic Expectations. The Review of Economics
and Statistics 102:4, 721-730. [Crossref]
132. Charlotte Wagnsson. 2020. What is at stake in the information sphere? Anxieties about malign
information influence among ordinary Swedes. European Security 29:4, 397-415. [Crossref]
133. Mohammad Abouei Mehrizi, Gianlorenzo D'Angelo. 2020. Multi-Winner Election Control via Social
Influence: Hardness and Algorithms for Restricted Cases. Algorithms 13:10, 251. [Crossref]
134. João Pedro Baptista, Anabela Gradim. 2020. Understanding Fake News Consumption: A Review.
Social Sciences 9:10, 185. [Crossref]
135. Ygor Bernardes Santos, Ian Baruc Costa e Silva, Eduardo Pontello Hass Gonçalves. 2020. Concepções
e Percepções de estudantes quanto a confiabilidade de notícias e Fake News. Revista Científica
Multidisciplinar Núcleo do Conhecimento 120-140. [Crossref]
136. A.K.M. Najmul Islam, Samuli Laato, Shamim Talukder, Erkki Sutinen. 2020. Misinformation
sharing and social media fatigue during COVID-19: An affordance and cognitive load perspective.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 159, 120201. [Crossref]
137. Daryna Dementieva, Alexander Panchenko. Fake News Detection using Multilingual Evidence
775-776. [Crossref]

138. Xinyi Zhou, Reza Zafarani. 2020. A Survey of Fake News. ACM Computing Surveys 53:5, 1-40.
[Crossref]
139. Justin Pomerance, Nicholas Light, Lawrence E. Williams. 2020. In these uncertain times: Fake news
amplifies the desires to save and spend in response to COVID-19. Journal of the Association for Consumer
Research . [Crossref]
140. Àlvar Peris-Blanes. 2020. Infoentretenimiento y espectáculo televisivo en la comunicación política
valenciana: las elecciones autonómicas de 2019 en la televisión pública À Punt. Congreso Internacional
de la Asociación Española de Investigación de la Comunicación 167-181. [Crossref]
141. Arjun Rajkhowa. 2020. The concept of authorial legacy in polarised debate on the ethics of social
media-driven activism. Media, Culture & Society 9, 016344372095788. [Crossref]
142. Eleni Kapantai, Androniki Christopoulou, Christos Berberidis, Vassilios Peristeras. 2020. A systematic
literature review on disinformation: Toward a unified taxonomical framework. New Media & Society
18, 146144482095929. [Crossref]
143. Sangwon Lee. 2020. Probing the Mechanisms Through Which Social Media Erodes Political
Knowledge: The Role of the News-Finds-Me Perception. Mass Communication and Society 12. .
[Crossref]
144. Lei Guo. 2020. China’s “Fake News” Problem: Exploring the Spread of Online Rumors in the
Government-Controlled News Media. Digital Journalism 8:8, 992-1010. [Crossref]
145. Craig T. Robertson, Rachel R. Mourão. 2020. Faking Alternative Journalism? An Analysis of SelfPresentations of “Fake News” Sites. Digital Journalism 8:8, 1011-1029. [Crossref]
146. Alberto Ardèvol-Abreu, Patricia Delponti, Carmen Rodríguez-Wangüemert. 2020. Intentional or
inadvertent fake news sharing? Fact-checking warnings and users’ interaction with social media
content. El profesional de la información . [Crossref]
147. Edson C. Tandoc, Matthew Chew, Darren Lim. Fake News 1-6. [Crossref]
148. Chau Tong, Hyungjin Gill, Jianing Li, Sebastián Valenzuela, Hernando Rojas. 2020. “Fake News Is
Anything They Say!” — Conceptualization and Weaponization of Fake News among the American
Public. Mass Communication and Society 23:5, 755-778. [Crossref]
149. Rui Wang, Yuan He, Jing Xu, Hongzhong Zhang. 2020. Fake news or bad news? Toward an emotiondriven cognitive dissonance model of misinformation diffusion. Asian Journal of Communication 30:5,
317-342. [Crossref]
150. Federico Vegetti, Moreno Mancosu. 2020. The Impact of Political Sophistication and Motivated
Reasoning on Misinformation. Political Communication 37:5, 678-695. [Crossref]
151. Federico Albanese, Sebastián Pinto, Viktoriya Semeshenko, Pablo Balenzuela. 2020. Analyzing mass
media influence using natural language processing and time series analysis. Journal of Physics:
Complexity 1:2, 025005. [Crossref]
152. Teresa Borges‐Tiago, Flavio Tiago, Osvaldo Silva, José Manuel Guaita Martínez, Dolores Botella‐
Carrubi. 2020. Online users' attitudes toward fake news: Implications for brand management.
Psychology & Marketing 37:9, 1171-1184. [Crossref]
153. Laura Studen, Victor Tiberius. 2020. Social Media, Quo Vadis? Prospective Development and
Implications. Future Internet 12:9, 146. [Crossref]
154. Sook Lim. 2020. Academic library guides for tackling fake news: A content analysis. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship 46:5, 102195. [Crossref]
155. Saoirse De Paor, Bahareh Heravi. 2020. Information literacy and fake news: How the field of
librarianship can help combat the epidemic of fake news. The Journal of Academic Librarianship 46:5,
102218. [Crossref]

156. Elisa F. Long, M. Keith Chen, Ryne Rohla. 2020. Political storms: Emergent partisan skepticism of
hurricane risks. Science Advances 6:37, eabb7906. [Crossref]
157. Nicolas M. Anspach, Taylor N. Carlson. 2020. What to Believe? Social Media Commentary and Belief
in Misinformation. Political Behavior 42:3, 697-718. [Crossref]
158. Aleksandra Urman. 2020. Context matters: political polarization on Twitter from a comparative
perspective. Media, Culture & Society 42:6, 857-879. [Crossref]
159. Elena-Alexandra Dumitru. 2020. Testing Children and Adolescents’ Ability to Identify Fake News:
A Combined Design of Quasi-Experiment and Group Discussions. Societies 10:3, 71. [Crossref]
160. Dean Eckles, Eytan Bakshy. 2020. Bias and High-Dimensional Adjustment in Observational Studies
of Peer Effects. Journal of the American Statistical Association 76, 1-11. [Crossref]
161. Taeku Lee, Christian Hosam. 2020. Fake News Is Real: The Significance and Sources of Disbelief in
Mainstream Media in Trump’s America. Sociological Forum 35:S1, 996-1018. [Crossref]
162. Raquel Recuero. 2020. #FraudenasUrnas: estratégias discursivas de desinformação no Twitter nas
eleições 2018. Revista Brasileira de Linguística Aplicada 20:3, 383-406. [Crossref]
163. Juan Sánchez-Villar, Enrique Bigné. 2020. Developing a blog trust scale via an international Delphi
panel. European Research on Management and Business Economics 26:3, 134-144. [Crossref]
164. Shashank Madhusudhan, Siddhant Mahurkar, Suresh Kumar Nagarajan. Attributional analysis of
Multi-Modal Fake News Detection Models (Grand Challenge) 451-455. [Crossref]
165. Ulrike Reisach. 2020. The responsibility of social media in times of societal and political manipulation.
European Journal of Operational Research . [Crossref]
166. Alina Vereshchaka, Seth Cosimini, Wen Dong. 2020. Analyzing and distinguishing fake and real news
to mitigate the problem of disinformation. Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory
26:3, 350-364. [Crossref]
167. Kathie M. d'I. Treen, Hywel T. P. Williams, Saffron J. O'Neill. 2020. Online misinformation about
climate change. WIREs Climate Change 11:5. . [Crossref]
168. . Social Media and Democracy 31, . [Crossref]
169. Andrew M. Guess, Benjamin A. Lyons. Misinformation, Disinformation, and Online Propaganda
10-33. [Crossref]
170. Chloe Wittenberg, Adam J. Berinsky. Misinformation and Its Correction 163-198. [Crossref]
171. Tim Hwang. Dealing with Disinformation: Evaluating the Case for Amendment of Section 230 of
the Communications Decency Act 252-285. [Crossref]
172. Heather C. Hughes, Israel Waismel-Manor. 2020. The Macedonian Fake News Industry and the 2016
US Election. PS: Political Science & Politics 6, 1-5. [Crossref]
173. Laura Rocca, Davide Giacomini, Paola Zola. 2020. Environmental disclosure and sentiment analysis:
state of the art and opportunities for public-sector organisations. Meditari Accountancy Research aheadof-print:ahead-of-print. . [Crossref]
174. Shaozeng Zhang, Bo Zhao, Yuanyuan Tian, Shenliang Chen. 2020. Stand with #StandingRock:
Envisioning an Epistemological Shift in Understanding Geospatial Big Data in the “Post-truth” Era.
Annals of the American Association of Geographers 90, 1-21. [Crossref]
175. Min Wang, Mingke Rao, Zhipeng Sun. 2020. Typology, Etiology, and Fact-Checking: A Pathological
Study of Top Fake News in China. Journalism Practice 6, 1-19. [Crossref]
176. Julio C. S. Reis, Philipe Melo, Kiran Garimella, Fabrício Benevenuto. 2020. Can WhatsApp
benefit from debunked fact-checked stories to reduce misinformation?. Harvard Kennedy School
Misinformation Review . [Crossref]
177. Ursula Smartt. Social media and fake news 191-206. [Crossref]

178. Josué Pereira da Silva Santos. 2020. Os(as) bibliotecários(as) na pós-pandemia: Desafios e perspectivas
na era das fake News. Revista Científica Multidisciplinar Núcleo do Conhecimento 05-20. [Crossref]
179. Matthew T. Binford, Bartosz W. Wojdynski, Yen-I Lee, Shuoya Sun, Andrea Briscoe. 2020. Invisible
transparency: Visual attention to disclosures and source recognition in Facebook political advertising.
Journal of Information Technology & Politics 1, 1-14. [Crossref]
180. Jyoti Prakash Singh, Abhinav Kumar, Nripendra P. Rana, Yogesh K. Dwivedi. 2020. AttentionBased LSTM Network for Rumor Veracity Estimation of Tweets. Information Systems Frontiers 20. .
[Crossref]
181. Omar Abu Arqoub, Adeola Abdulateef Elega, Bahire Efe Özad, Hanadi Dwikat, Felix Adedamola
Oloyede. 2020. Mapping the Scholarship of Fake News Research: A Systematic Review. Journalism
Practice 117, 1-31. [Crossref]
182. K. Hazel Kwon, Chun Shao, Seungahn Nah. 2020. Localized social media and civic life: Motivations,
trust, and civic participation in local community contexts. Journal of Information Technology & Politics
10, 1-15. [Crossref]
183. Janelle Benham. 2020. Best Practices for Journalistic Balance: Gatekeeping, Imbalance and the Fake
News Era. Journalism Practice 14:7, 791-811. [Crossref]
184. Jordan R. Axt, Mark J. Landau, Aaron C. Kay. Fake News Attributions as a Source of Nonspecific
Structure 220-234. [Crossref]
185. Clark A. Chinn, Sarit Barzilai, Ravit Golan Duncan. 2020. Education for a “Post-Truth” World: New
Directions for Research and Practice. Educational Researcher 0013189X2094068. [Crossref]
186. Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, Maria Petrova, Ruben Enikolopov. 2020. Political Effects of the Internet and
Social Media. Annual Review of Economics 12:1, 415-438. [Crossref]
187. Rong Tang, Kyong Eun Oh. 2020. University students’ mobile news consumption activities and
evaluative/affective reactions to political news during election campaigns: A diary study. Journal of
Information Science 46:4, 476-495. [Crossref]
188. Zhongyuan Ruan, Bin Yu, Xincheng Shu, Qingpeng Zhang, Qi Xuan. 2020. The impact of malicious
nodes on the spreading of false information. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science
30:8, 083101. [Crossref]
189. Caitlin Drummond, Michael Siegrist, Joseph Árvai. 2020. Limited effects of exposure to fake news
about climate change. Environmental Research Communications 2:8, 081003. [Crossref]
190. Austin Lyke. 2020. College Students’ Support for Wealth Redistribution: Evidence From a National
Survey. Journal of College and Character 21:3, 171-185. [Crossref]
191. Theófilo Rodrigues, Daniel Ferreira. 2020. ESTRATÉGIAS DIGITAIS DOS POPULISMOS DE
ESQUERDA E DE DIREITA: BRASIL E ESPANHA EM PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA.
Trabalhos em Linguística Aplicada 59:2, 1070-1086. [Crossref]
192. Ric Neo. 2020. The securitisation of fake news in Singapore. International Politics 57:4, 724-740.
[Crossref]
193. Trevor Treharne, Andrew Papanikitas. 2020. Defining and detecting fake news in health and medicine
reporting. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 113:8, 302-305. [Crossref]
194. Benjamin D. Horne, Dorit Nevo, Sibel Adali, Lydia Manikonda, Clare Arrington. 2020. Tailoring
heuristics and timing AI interventions for supporting news veracity assessments. Computers in Human
Behavior Reports 2, 100043. [Crossref]
195. Thomas Colley, Francesca Granelli, Jente Althuis. 2020. DISINFORMATION’S SOCIETAL
IMPACT: BRITAIN, COVID, AND BEYOND. Defence Strategic Communications :8, 89-140.
[Crossref]

196. Dongmei Fan, Jinling Wang. 2020. An individual-based mean-field model for fake-news spreading
on PSO-based networks. International Journal of Modern Physics B 34:19, 2050172. [Crossref]
197. Alessandra Cavalcante Scherma Schurig. 2020. Pós-modernidade e as duas faces de Janus: o Cogito
Digital e o Solipsismo diante da desconstrução da metafísica. Intuitio 13:1, e34954. [Crossref]
198. Jana Laura Egelhofer, Loes Aaldering, Jakob-Moritz Eberl, Sebastian Galyga, Sophie Lecheler. 2020.
From Novelty to Normalization? How Journalists Use the Term “Fake News” in their Reporting.
Journalism Studies 21:10, 1323-1343. [Crossref]
199. Keith Conti, Shania Desai, Stanislaw P. Stawicki, Thomas J. Papadimos. The Evolving Interplay
between Social Media and International Health Security: A Point of View . [Crossref]
200. Jonathan Clarke, Hailiang Chen, Ding Du, Yu Jeffrey Hu. 2020. Fake News, Investor Attention, and
Market Reaction. Information Systems Research . [Crossref]
201. V. P. Miletskiy, O. A. Nikifоrova. 2020. Evolution of Political Simulacra in Digital Society (on the
Examples of “fake news” and “post-truth”). Discourse 6:3, 64-77. [Crossref]
202. S Mo Jones-Jang, Dam Hee Kim, Kate Kenski. 2020. Perceptions of mis- or disinformation exposure
predict political cynicism: Evidence from a two-wave survey during the 2018 US midterm elections.
New Media & Society 16, 146144482094387. [Crossref]
203. Kiyoung Chang, Jeeyoung Park. 2020. Social Media Use and Participation in Dueling Protests: The
Case of the 2016–2017 Presidential Corruption Scandal in South Korea. The International Journal of
Press/Politics 114, 194016122094096. [Crossref]
204. Premal P. Vora. 2020. Clogged information flow and stock-market sluggishness. PLOS ONE 15:7,
e0235978. [Crossref]
205. Liam McLoughlin, Rosalynd Southern. 2020. By any memes necessary? Small political acts, incidental
exposure and memes during the 2017 UK general election. The British Journal of Politics and
International Relations 3, 136914812093059. [Crossref]
206. Kanwal Ameen, Salman Bin Naeem. 2020. Demographic differences in the perceived news literacy
skills and sharing behavior of information professionals. Information Discovery and Delivery aheadof-print:ahead-of-print. . [Crossref]
207. Isabele Mitozo, Michele Goulart Massuchin, Francisco Paulo Jamil Marques. Social Media:
Complexities and Contradictions 1-7. [Crossref]
208. Andrew M. Guess, Michael Lerner, Benjamin Lyons, Jacob M. Montgomery, Brendan Nyhan, Jason
Reifler, Neelanjan Sircar. 2020. A digital media literacy intervention increases discernment between
mainstream and false news in the United States and India. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117:27, 15536-15545. [Crossref]
209. Spencer McKay, Chris Tenove. 2020. Disinformation as a Threat to Deliberative Democracy. Political
Research Quarterly 6, 106591292093814. [Crossref]
210. Leonie Schaewitz, Jan P. Kluck, Lukas Klösters, Nicole C. Krämer. 2020. When is Disinformation
(In)Credible? Experimental Findings on Message Characteristics and Individual Differences. Mass
Communication and Society 23:4, 484-509. [Crossref]
211. Manuel Goyanes. 2020. Antecedents of Incidental News Exposure: The Role of Media Preference,
Use and Trust. Journalism Practice 14:6, 714-729. [Crossref]
212. Sarit Barzilai, Clark A. Chinn. 2020. A review of educational responses to the “post-truth” condition:
Four lenses on “post-truth” problems. Educational Psychologist 55:3, 107-119. [Crossref]
213. Vered Elishar-Malka, Yaron Ariel, Gabriel Weimann. 2020. Rethinking political communication in
the digital sphere. The Journal of International Communication 26:2, 190-210. [Crossref]

214. Michael O. Ukonu, Joel C. Ugwuoke, Jude C. Ifeanyichukwu. 2020. Nigerian newspaper coverage and
media audiences’ opinions on the major candidates in the 2016 US presidential elections. The Journal
of International Communication 26:2, 281-304. [Crossref]
215. Christian Tatchou Nounkeu. 2020. Facebook and Fake News in the “Anglophone Crisis” in Cameroon.
African Journalism Studies 41:3, 20-35. [Crossref]
216. Florian Saurwein, Charlotte Spencer-Smith. 2020. Combating Disinformation on Social Media:
Multilevel Governance and Distributed Accountability in Europe. Digital Journalism 8:6, 820-841.
[Crossref]
217. Dongmei Fan, Guo-Ping Jiang, Yu-Rong Song, Yin-Wei Li. 2020. Novel fake news spreading model
with similarity on PSO-based networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 549,
124319. [Crossref]
218. Cristina M Pulido, Beatriz Villarejo-Carballido, Gisela Redondo-Sama, Aitor Gómez. 2020.
COVID-19 infodemic: More retweets for science-based information on coronavirus than for false
information. International Sociology 35:4, 377-392. [Crossref]
219. Tong Zeng, Daniel E. Acuna. 2020. Modeling citation worthiness by using attention-based
bidirectional long short-term memory networks and interpretable models. Scientometrics 124:1,
399-428. [Crossref]
220. Gabriela Elisa Sued, Martín Rodriguez Kedikian. 2020. Noticias falsas en Facebook: narrativas,
circulación y verificación. Los casos de Argentina y México. Estudios sobre el Mensaje Periodístico 26:3,
1229-1242. [Crossref]
221. Edda Humprecht, Frank Esser, Peter Van Aelst. 2020. Resilience to Online Disinformation: A
Framework for Cross-National Comparative Research. The International Journal of Press/Politics 25:3,
493-516. [Crossref]
222. Chris Tenove. 2020. Protecting Democracy from Disinformation: Normative Threats and Policy
Responses. The International Journal of Press/Politics 25:3, 517-537. [Crossref]
223. Sebastian Stier, Nora Kirkizh, Caterina Froio, Ralph Schroeder. 2020. Populist Attitudes and Selective
Exposure to Online News: A Cross-Country Analysis Combining Web Tracking and Surveys. The
International Journal of Press/Politics 25:3, 426-446. [Crossref]
224. Yevgeniy Golovchenko, Cody Buntain, Gregory Eady, Megan A. Brown, Joshua A. Tucker. 2020.
Cross-Platform State Propaganda: Russian Trolls on Twitter and YouTube during the 2016 U.S.
Presidential Election. The International Journal of Press/Politics 25:3, 357-389. [Crossref]
225. Karolina Koc-Michalska, Bruce Bimber, Daniel Gomez, Matthew Jenkins, Shelley Boulianne. 2020.
Public Beliefs about Falsehoods in News. The International Journal of Press/Politics 25:3, 447-468.
[Crossref]
226. Simon Loertscher, Leslie M. Marx. 2020. Digital monopolies: Privacy protection or price regulation?.
International Journal of Industrial Organization 71, 102623. [Crossref]
227. Jordan R. Axt, Mark J. Landau, Aaron C. Kay. 2020. The Psychological Appeal of Fake-News
Attributions. Psychological Science 31:7, 848-857. [Crossref]
228. William J. Brady, M. J. Crockett, Jay J. Van Bavel. 2020. The MAD Model of Moral Contagion: The
Role of Motivation, Attention, and Design in the Spread of Moralized Content Online. Perspectives
on Psychological Science 15:4, 978-1010. [Crossref]
229. Philip E. Pare, Damir Vrabac, Henrik Sandberg, Karl H. Johansson. Analysis, Online Estimation,
and Validation of a Competing Virus Model 2556-2561. [Crossref]
230. Shan Qu, Ziqi Zhao, Luoyi Fu, Xinbing Wang, Jun Xu. Joint Inference on Truth/Rumor and Their
Sources in Social Networks 924-933. [Crossref]

231. Fabrizio Germano, Francesco Sobbrio. 2020. Opinion dynamics via search engines (and other
algorithmic gatekeepers). Journal of Public Economics 187, 104188. [Crossref]
232. Gabriella Pasi, Marco De Grandis, Marco Viviani. Decision Making over Multiple Criteria to Assess
News Credibility in Microblogging Sites 1-8. [Crossref]
233. Jianxiong Guo, Yi Li, Weili Wu. 2020. Targeted Protection Maximization in Social Networks. IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 7:3, 1645-1655. [Crossref]
234. Giandomenico Di Domenico, Marco Visentin. 2020. Fake news or true lies? Reflections about
problematic contents in marketing. International Journal of Market Research 62:4, 409-417. [Crossref]
235. Christian Gläßel, Katrin Paula. 2020. Sometimes Less Is More: Censorship, News Falsification, and
Disapproval in 1989 East Germany. American Journal of Political Science 64:3, 682-698. [Crossref]
236. Rajvikram Madurai Elavarasan, Rishi Pugazhendhi. 2020. Restructured society and environment: A
review on potential technological strategies to control the COVID-19 pandemic. Science of The Total
Environment 725, 138858. [Crossref]
237. Mohamed Sami Ben Ali. 2020. Does ICT promote democracy similarily in developed and developing
countries? A linear and nonlinear panel threshold framework. Telematics and Informatics 50, 101382.
[Crossref]
238. Anna-Katharina Jung, Björn Ross, Stefan Stieglitz. 2020. Caution: Rumors ahead—A case study on
the debunking of false information on Twitter. Big Data & Society 7:2, 205395172098012. [Crossref]
239. Mehmet Fatih ÇÖMLEKÇİ. 2020. Kamu Diplomasisinin Genişleyen Repertuarı: Medya
Okuryazarlığı ve Doğruluk Kontrol Platformları. Akdeniz Üniversitesi İletişim Fakültesi Dergisi 211-229.
[Crossref]
240. Ali Fikret AYDIN. 2020. POST-TRUTH DÖNEMDE SOSYAL MEDYADA
DEZENFORMASYON: COVİD-19 (YENİ KORONAVİRÜS) PANDEMİ SÜRECİ. ASYA
STUDIES 76-90. [Crossref]
241. Shirley S Ho, Tong Jee Goh, Yan Wah Leung. 2020. Let’s nab fake science news: Predicting scientists’
support for interventions using the influence of presumed media influence model. Journalism 2,
146488492093748. [Crossref]
242. Neri Marsili. 2020. Retweeting: its linguistic and epistemic value. Synthese 94. . [Crossref]
243. Concha Pérez-Curiel, Mar García-Gordillo. 2020. Del debate electoral en TV al ciberdebate en
Twitter. Encuadres de influencia en las elecciones generales en España (28A). El profesional de la
información . [Crossref]
244. Hassan Zamir. Cybersecurity and Social Media 153-171. [Crossref]
245. Dumisani Moyo, Admire Mare, Trust Matsilele. Analytics-Driven Journalism: Editorial metrics and
the reconfiguration of online news production practices in African newsrooms 104-120. [Crossref]
246. Matteo Cinelli, Stefano Cresci, Alessandro Galeazzi, Walter Quattrociocchi, Maurizio Tesconi. 2020.
The limited reach of fake news on Twitter during 2019 European elections. PLOS ONE 15:6,
e0234689. [Crossref]
247. Patrick Taillon. From veracity to traceability 257-280. [Crossref]
248. Berna Leticia Valle Canales, Julio César Chavarría Hernandez. Semiotic Architecture of Viral Data .
[Crossref]
249. Rachel E. Moran. 2020. Subscribing to Transparency: Trust-Building Within Virtual Newsrooms
on Slack. Journalism Practice 15, 1-17. [Crossref]
250. Andreas Jungherr, Gonzalo Rivero, Daniel Gayo-Avello. Retooling Politics 3, . [Crossref]
251. José Morais, Régine Kolinsky. 2020. Seeing thought: a cultural cognitive tool. Journal of Cultural
Cognitive Science 39. . [Crossref]

252. Jamie L. Grigsby. 2020. Fake Ads: The Influence of Counterfeit Native Ads on Brands and Consumers.
Journal of Promotion Management 26:4, 569-592. [Crossref]
253. Katherine Ognyanova, David Lazer, Ronald E. Robertson, Christo Wilson. 2020. Misinformation in
action: Fake news exposure is linked to lower trust in media, higher trust in government when your
side is in power. Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation Review . [Crossref]
254. Pier Luigi Parcu. 2020. New digital threats to media pluralism in the information age. Competition
and Regulation in Network Industries 21:2, 91-109. [Crossref]
255. Patrick Ferrucci, Toby Hopp, Chris J Vargo. 2020. Civic engagement, social capital, and ideological
extremity: Exploring online political engagement and political expression on Facebook. New Media
& Society 22:6, 1095-1115. [Crossref]
256. Stephanie Jean Tsang. 2020. Issue stance and perceived journalistic motives explain divergent audience
perceptions of fake news. Journalism 10, 146488492092600. [Crossref]
257. Paul D. Kenny. 2020. “The Enemy of the People”: Populists and Press Freedom. Political Research
Quarterly 73:2, 261-275. [Crossref]
258. Petra Pelletier, Ewa Drozda‐Senkowska. 2020. Towards a socially situated rumouring: Historical
and critical perspectives of rumour transmission. Social and Personality Psychology Compass 14:6. .
[Crossref]
259. Diyana Dobreva, Daniel Grinnell, Martin Innes. 2020. Prophets and Loss: How “Soft Facts” on Social
Media Influenced the Brexit Campaign and Social Reactions to the Murder of Jo Cox MP. Policy &
Internet 12:2, 144-164. [Crossref]
260. Elizabeth F. Judge, Amir M. Korhani. 2020. Disinformation, Digital Information Equality, and
Electoral Integrity. Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy 19:2, 240-261. [Crossref]
261. Netina Tan. 2020. Electoral Management of Digital Campaigns and Disinformation in East and
Southeast Asia. Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy 19:2, 214-239. [Crossref]
262. Radislav Vaisman. 2020. Subset selection via continuous optimization with applications to network
design. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 192:6. . [Crossref]
263. Matthew Spradling, Jeremy Straub, Jay Strong. Introducing & Evaluating ‘Nutrition Facts’ for Online
Content 1-8. [Crossref]
264. Nadia M. Brashier, Daniel L. Schacter. 2020. Aging in an Era of Fake News. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 29:3, 316-323. [Crossref]
265. Mi Rosie Jahng, Hyunmin Lee, Annisa Rochadiat. 2020. Public relations practitioners’ management
of fake news: Exploring key elements and acts of information authentication. Public Relations Review
46:2, 101907. [Crossref]
266. Michele Coscia, Luca Rossi. 2020. Distortions of political bias in crowdsourced misinformation
flagging. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 17:167, 20200020. [Crossref]
267. Vanya Tiwari, Ruth G. Lennon, Thomas Dowling. Not Everything You Read Is True! Fake News
Detection using Machine learning Algorithms 1-4. [Crossref]
268. Virginia Small, James Warn. 2020. Impacts on food policy from traditional and social media framing
of moral outrage and cultural stereotypes. Agriculture and Human Values 37:2, 295-309. [Crossref]
269. Roberto Mosquera, Mofioluwasademi Odunowo, Trent McNamara, Xiongfei Guo, Ragan Petrie.
2020. The economic effects of Facebook. Experimental Economics 23:2, 575-602. [Crossref]
270. Marcela Borge, Yann Shiou Ong, Sean Goggins. 2020. A sociocultural approach to using social
networking sites as learning tools. Educational Technology Research and Development 68:3, 1089-1120.
[Crossref]

271. Rebecca Roth, Jaclyn Abraham, Heidi Zinzow, Pamela Wisniewski, Amro Khasawneh, Kapil Chalil
Madathil. 2020. Evaluating News Media Reports on the 'Blue Whale Challenge' for Adherence
to Suicide Prevention Safe Messaging Guidelines. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 4:CSCW1, 1-27. [Crossref]
272. Sarah A. Gilbert. 2020. "I run the world's largest historical outreach project and it's on a cesspool
of a website." Moderating a Public Scholarship Site on Reddit: A Case Study of r/AskHistorians.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4:CSCW1, 1-27. [Crossref]
273. Eslam Hussein, Prerna Juneja, Tanushree Mitra. 2020. Measuring Misinformation in Video Search
Platforms: An Audit Study on YouTube. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
4:CSCW1, 1-27. [Crossref]
274. Apoorva Chauhan, Amanda Lee Hughes. 2020. Trustworthiness Perceptions of Social Media
Resources Named after a Crisis Event. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
4:CSCW1, 1-23. [Crossref]
275. Hyunjin Seo, Matthew Blomberg, Darcey Altschwager, Hong Tien Vu. 2020. Vulnerable populations
and misinformation: A mixed-methods approach to underserved older adults’ online information
assessment. New Media & Society 40, 146144482092504. [Crossref]
276. Oliver Kovacs. 2020. The Hungarian eurology – the road to perdition?. Post-Communist Economies
27, 1-23. [Crossref]
277. Chelsea Kaufman. 2020. Civic Education in a Fake News Era: Lessons for the Methods Classroom.
Journal of Political Science Education 26, 1-6. [Crossref]
278. Mario Haim. 2020. Agent-based Testing: An Automated Approach toward Artificial Reactions to
Human Behavior. Journalism Studies 21:7, 895-911. [Crossref]
279. Eedan R. Amit-Danhi, Limor Shifman. 2020. Off the charts: user engagement enhancers in election
infographics. Information, Communication & Society 8, 1-19. [Crossref]
280. Xiongfei Cao, Mingchuan Gong, Lingling Yu, Bao Dai. 2020. Exploring the mechanism of social
media addiction: an empirical study from WeChat users. Internet Research 30:4, 1305-1328. [Crossref]
281. Caio V. Meneses Silva, Raphael Silva Fontes, Methanias Colaço Júnior. 2020. Intelligent Fake News
Detection: A Systematic Mapping. Journal of Applied Security Research 828, 1-22. [Crossref]
282. Margaret E. Roberts. 2020. Resilience to Online Censorship. Annual Review of Political Science 23:1,
401-419. [Crossref]
283. Abdul Noury, Gerard Roland. 2020. Identity Politics and Populism in Europe. Annual Review of
Political Science 23:1, 421-439. [Crossref]
284. Febbie Austina Kwanda, Trisha T. C. Lin. 2020. Fake news practices in Indonesian newsrooms during
and after the Palu earthquake: a hierarchy-of-influences approach. Information, Communication &
Society 23:6, 849-866. [Crossref]
285. Daniel J. Tamul, Adrienne Holz Ivory, Jessica Hotter, Jordan Wolf. 2020. All the President’s Tweets:
Effects of Exposure to Trump’s “Fake News” Accusations on Perceptions of Journalists, News Stories,
and Issue Evaluation. Mass Communication and Society 23:3, 301-330. [Crossref]
286. Kevin Munger. 2020. All the News That’s Fit to Click: The Economics of Clickbait Media. Political
Communication 37:3, 376-397. [Crossref]
287. Samuli Laato, A. K. M. Najmul Islam, Muhammad Nazrul Islam, Eoin Whelan. 2020. What drives
unverified information sharing and cyberchondria during the COVID-19 pandemic?. European Journal
of Information Systems 29:3, 288-305. [Crossref]
288. Victor Chidubem Iwuoha. 2020. ‘Fake News’ and ‘Half-truths’ in the Framings of Boko Haram
Narrative: Implications on International Counterterrorism Responses. The International Journal of
Intelligence, Security, and Public Affairs 22:2, 82-103. [Crossref]

289. Darrel Robinson. 2020. Education, Family Background, and Political Knowledge: A Test of the
Compensation Hypothesis with Identical Twins. Political Studies 68:2, 350-369. [Crossref]
290. Paulo Garcia, Francine Darroch, Leah West, Lauren BrooksCleator. 2020. Ethical Applications of
Big Data-Driven AI on Social Systems: Literature Analysis and Example Deployment Use Case.
Information 11:5, 235. [Crossref]
291. Yiangos Papanastasiou. 2020. Fake News Propagation and Detection: A Sequential Model.
Management Science 66:5, 1826-1846. [Crossref]
292. Marçal Mora-Cantallops, Salvador Sánchez-Alonso, Elena García-Barriocanal, Miguel-Ángel Sicilia.
2020. Authority-Based Conversation Tracking in Twitter: An Unattended Methodological Approach.
Applied Sciences 10:9, 3273. [Crossref]
293. Hugo Queiroz Abonizio, Janaina Ignacio de Morais, Gabriel Marques Tavares, Sylvio Barbon Junior.
2020. Language-Independent Fake News Detection: English, Portuguese, and Spanish Mutual
Features. Future Internet 12:5, 87. [Crossref]
294. Santiago Alonso García, Gerardo Gómez García, Mariano Sanz Prieto, Antonio José Moreno Guerrero,
Carmen Rodríguez Jiménez. 2020. The Impact of Term Fake News on the Scientific Community.
Scientific Performance and Mapping in Web of Science. Social Sciences 9:5, 73. [Crossref]
295. Elizabeth Riddle, Jill R. D. MacKay. 2020. Social Media Contexts Moderate Perceptions of Animals.
Animals 10:5, 845. [Crossref]
296. Syed Shafat Ali, Tarique Anwar, Syed Afzal Murtaza Rizvi. 2020. A Revisit to the Infection Source
Identification Problem under Classical Graph Centrality Measures. Online Social Networks and Media
17, 100061. [Crossref]
297. Jeremy Kepner, Tim Davis, Chansup Byun, William Arcand, David Bestor, William Bergeron, Vijay
Gadepally, Matthew Hubbell, Michael Houle, Michael Jones, Anna Klein, Peter Michaleas, Lauren
Milechin, Julie Mullen, Andrew Prout, Antonio Rosa, Siddharth Samsi, Charles Yee, Albert Reuther.
75,000,000,000 Streaming Inserts/Second Using Hierarchical Hypersparse GraphBLAS Matrices
207-210. [Crossref]
298. Ian P. McCarthy, David Hannah, Leyland F. Pitt, Jane M. McCarthy. 2020. Confronting indifference
toward truth: Dealing with workplace bullshit. Business Horizons 63:3, 253-263. [Crossref]
299. Jay J. Van Bavel, Katherine Baicker, Paulo S. Boggio, Valerio Capraro, Aleksandra Cichocka, Mina
Cikara, Molly J. Crockett, Alia J. Crum, Karen M. Douglas, James N. Druckman, John Drury,
Oeindrila Dube, Naomi Ellemers, Eli J. Finkel, James H. Fowler, Michele Gelfand, Shihui Han, S.
Alexander Haslam, Jolanda Jetten, Shinobu Kitayama, Dean Mobbs, Lucy E. Napper, Dominic J.
Packer, Gordon Pennycook, Ellen Peters, Richard E. Petty, David G. Rand, Stephen D. Reicher,
Simone Schnall, Azim Shariff, Linda J. Skitka, Sandra Susan Smith, Cass R. Sunstein, Nassim Tabri,
Joshua A. Tucker, Sander van der Linden, Paul van Lange, Kim A. Weeden, Michael J. A. Wohl, Jamil
Zaki, Sean R. Zion, Robb Willer. 2020. Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19
pandemic response. Nature Human Behaviour 395. . [Crossref]
300. María José ARROJO. 2020. Las Ciencias de la Comunicación desde el realismo científico: El problema
de la complejidad y las noticias falsas (fake news). ArtefaCToS. Revista de estudios sobre la ciencia y la
tecnología 9:1, 131. [Crossref]
301. Marcus W. Mayorga, Erin B. Hester, Emily Helsel, Bobi Ivanov, Timothy L. Sellnow, Paul Slovic,
William J. Burns, Dale Frakes. Enhancing Public Resistance to “Fake News” 197-212. [Crossref]
302. Moses Ofome Asak, Tshepang Bright Molale. 2020. Deconstructing De-legitimization of Mainstream
Media as Sources of Authentic News in the Post-Truth Era. Communicatio 12, 1-25. [Crossref]
303. Jacob L. Nelson. 2020. The Enduring Popularity of Legacy Journalism: An Analysis of Online
Audience Data. Media and Communication 8:2, 40. [Crossref]

304. Ellen Haggar. 2020. Fighting fake news: exploring George Orwell's relationship to information
literacy. Journal of Documentation 76:5, 961-979. [Crossref]
305. Simone Chambers. 2020. Truth, Deliberative Democracy, and the Virtues of Accuracy: Is Fake News
Destroying the Public Sphere?. Political Studies 003232171989081. [Crossref]
306. Ludovico Iovino, Mattia D’Emidio, Marco Modica. 2020. Creating an Holistic Emergency Alert
Management Platform. Journal of Urban Technology 27:2, 3-20. [Crossref]
307. Jonathan Cinnamon. 2020. Data inequalities and why they matter for development. Information
Technology for Development 26:2, 214-233. [Crossref]
308. Yariv Tsfati, H. G. Boomgaarden, J. Strömbäck, R. Vliegenthart, A. Damstra, E. Lindgren. 2020.
Causes and consequences of mainstream media dissemination of fake news: literature review and
synthesis. Annals of the International Communication Association 44:2, 157-173. [Crossref]
309. Nicole Ruggiano, Taylor Ellis, Kimberly Gibson, Shayla Smith, Carrie Turner, Allison Curington,
Carroll Phelps, Alexis Ferruccio, Keslie Fendley. 2020. The Unity Wall project: a student-led
community organizing effort to advance public discourse on social justice. Journal of Community
Practice 28:2, 132-143. [Crossref]
310. Hazrat M. Bahar. 2020. Social media and disinformation in war propaganda: how Afghan government
and the Taliban use Twitter. Media Asia 47:1-2, 34-46. [Crossref]
311. Lianwei Wu, Yuan Rao, Ambreen Nazir, Haolin Jin. 2020. Discovering differential features:
Adversarial learning for information credibility evaluation. Information Sciences 516, 453-473.
[Crossref]
312. Gordon Pennycook, David G. Rand. 2020. Who falls for fake news? The roles of bullshit receptivity,
overclaiming, familiarity, and analytic thinking. Journal of Personality 88:2, 185-200. [Crossref]
313. Petros Iosifidis, Leighton Andrews. 2020. Regulating the internet intermediaries in a post-truth
world: Beyond media policy?. International Communication Gazette 82:3, 211-230. [Crossref]
314. Jennifer Allen, Baird Howland, Markus Mobius, David Rothschild, Duncan J. Watts. 2020. Evaluating
the fake news problem at the scale of the information ecosystem. Science Advances 6:14, eaay3539.
[Crossref]
315. Nigel Hardiman, Shelley Burgin, Jia Shao. 2020. How Sharks and Shark–Human Interactions are
Reported in Major Australian Newspapers. Sustainability 12:7, 2683. [Crossref]
316. Mina Kwon, Michael J. Barone. 2020. A World of Mistrust: Fake News, Mistrust Mind-Sets, and
Product Evaluations. Journal of the Association for Consumer Research 5:2, 206-219. [Crossref]
317. Ícaro Joathan, Marcelo Alves. 2020. O Twitter como ferramenta de campanha negativa não oficial:
uma análise da campanha eleitoral para a Prefeitura do Rio de Janeiro em 2016. Galáxia (São Paulo)
31:43, 81-98. [Crossref]
318. Julii Brainard, Paul R Hunter. 2020. Misinformation making a disease outbreak worse: outcomes
compared for influenza, monkeypox, and norovirus. SIMULATION 96:4, 365-374. [Crossref]
319. Jiawei Zhang, Bowen Dong, Philip S. Yu. FakeDetector: Effective Fake News Detection with Deep
Diffusive Neural Network 1826-1829. [Crossref]
320. Kevin Koidl, Kristina G. Kapanova. 2020. Introduction to the Special Issue: Re-Imagining a More
Trustworthy Social Media Future. Social Media + Society 6:2, 205630512092300. [Crossref]
321. Vanessa Ceia. 2020. Digital Ecosystems of Ideology: Linked Media as Rhetoric in Spanish Political
Tweets. Social Media + Society 6:2, 205630512092663. [Crossref]
322. Sander van der Linden, Costas Panagopoulos, Jon Roozenbeek. 2020. You are fake news: political bias
in perceptions of fake news. Media, Culture & Society 42:3, 460-470. [Crossref]

323. Peter J. Jost, Johanna Pünder, Isabell Schulze-Lohoff. 2020. Fake news - Does perception matter
more than the truth?. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 85, 101513. [Crossref]
324. Elif Başak SARIOĞLU. 2020. Yalan Haber, “Post-Truth” Kavramı ve Medya Üçlemesi: Geçmişten
Günümüze Gündem Belirleyen Örnekler. İnsan ve Toplum Bilimleri Araştırmaları Dergisi 9:1, 377-397.
[Crossref]

325. Patrick Mutahi, Brian Kimari. 2020. Fake News and the 2017 Kenyan Elections. Communicatio 3,
1-19. [Crossref]
326. Edda Humprecht. 2020. How Do They Debunk “Fake News”? A Cross-National Comparison of
Transparency in Fact Checks. Digital Journalism 8:3, 310-327. [Crossref]
327. Matteo Cinelli, Emanuele Brugnoli, Ana Lucia Schmidt, Fabiana Zollo, Walter Quattrociocchi,
Antonio Scala. 2020. Selective exposure shapes the Facebook news diet. PLOS ONE 15:3, e0229129.
[Crossref]
328. Oberiri Destiny Apuke, Bahiyah Omar. 2020. FAKE NEWS PROLIFERATION IN NIGERIA:
CONSEQUENCES, MOTIVATIONS, AND PREVENTION THROUGH AWARENESS
STRATEGIES. Humanities & Social Sciences Reviews 8:2, 318-327. [Crossref]
329. Panayiota Kendeou, Rina Harsch, Reese Butterfuss, Joseph Aubele, Jasmine Kim. The Challenge of
Fake News 477-494. [Crossref]
330. Michael Schudson, Gal Beckerman. “Old” Media, “New” Media, Hybrid Media, and the Changing
Character of Political Participation 269-289. [Crossref]
331. Alessandro Nai. 2020. The Trump Paradox: How Cues from a Disliked Source Foster Resistance to
Persuasion. Politics and Governance 8:1, 122. [Crossref]
332. Deen Freelon, Chris Wells. 2020. Disinformation as Political Communication. Political
Communication 37:2, 145-156. [Crossref]
333. Samantha Bradshaw, Philip N. Howard, Bence Kollanyi, Lisa-Maria Neudert. 2020. Sourcing and
Automation of Political News and Information over Social Media in the United States, 2016-2018.
Political Communication 37:2, 173-193. [Crossref]
334. Franziska B. Keller, David Schoch, Sebastian Stier, JungHwan Yang. 2020. Political Astroturfing on
Twitter: How to Coordinate a Disinformation Campaign. Political Communication 37:2, 256-280.
[Crossref]
335. Fabian Zimmermann, Matthias Kohring. 2020. Mistrust, Disinforming News, and Vote Choice: A
Panel Survey on the Origins and Consequences of Believing Disinformation in the 2017 German
Parliamentary Election. Political Communication 37:2, 215-237. [Crossref]
336. Ozan Candogan, Kimon Drakopoulos. 2020. Optimal Signaling of Content Accuracy: Engagement
vs. Misinformation. Operations Research . [Crossref]
337. Andrew M. Guess, Brendan Nyhan, Jason Reifler. 2020. Exposure to untrustworthy websites in the
2016 US election. Nature Human Behaviour 31. . [Crossref]
338. Xichen Zhang, Ali A. Ghorbani. 2020. An overview of online fake news: Characterization, detection,
and discussion. Information Processing & Management 57:2, 102025. [Crossref]
339. Gabriele Gratton, Galina Zudenkova. 2020. Introduction to the Special Issue Political Games: Strategy,
Persuasion, and Learning. Games 11:1, 10. [Crossref]
340. Lei Guo, Chris Vargo. 2020. “Fake News” and Emerging Online Media Ecosystem: An Integrated
Intermedia Agenda-Setting Analysis of the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election. Communication Research
47:2, 178-200. [Crossref]
341. Amber E. Boydstun, Regina G. Lawrence. 2020. When Celebrity and Political Journalism Collide:
Reporting Standards, Entertainment, and the Conundrum of Covering Donald Trump’s 2016
Campaign. Perspectives on Politics 18:1, 128-143. [Crossref]

342. Joseph Downing, Richard Dron. 2020. Tweeting Grenfell: Discourse and networks in critical
constructions of British Muslim social boundaries on social media. New Media & Society 22:3,
449-469. [Crossref]
343. Hunt Allcott, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, Matthew Gentzkow. 2020. The Welfare Effects of
Social Media. American Economic Review 110:3, 629-676. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with
links]
344. Edson C Tandoc, Darren Lim, Rich Ling. 2020. Diffusion of disinformation: How social media users
respond to fake news and why. Journalism 21:3, 381-398. [Crossref]
345. Brian C. Britt. 2020. Modeling viral diffusion using quantum computational network simulation.
Quantum Engineering 2:1. . [Crossref]
346. Chandan Kumar Jha, Oasis Kodila-Tedika. 2020. Does social media promote democracy? Some
empirical evidence. Journal of Policy Modeling 42:2, 271-290. [Crossref]
347. Laura Faragó, Anna Kende, Péter Krekó. 2020. We Only Believe in News That We Doctored
Ourselves. Social Psychology 51:2, 77-90. [Crossref]
348. Mamoun Masoud Abdulqader, Yousof Zohair Almunsour. 2020. Investigating the Effects of Social
Media on Higher Education with a Case Study. Journal of Information & Knowledge Management
19:01, 2040023. [Crossref]
349. Kassegn Berhanu, Sahil Raj. 2020. The trustworthiness of travel and tourism information sources of
social media: perspectives of international tourists visiting Ethiopia. Heliyon 6:3, e03439. [Crossref]
350. . Theoretical Approaches 83-202. [Crossref]
351. Uttaran Dutta, Judith N. Martin. Sociological Approaches to Intercultural Communication 170-186.
[Crossref]
352. Robert Dover. 2020. SOCMINT: a shifting balance of opportunity. Intelligence and National Security
35:2, 216-232. [Crossref]
353. Camilla Salvatore, Silvia Biffignandi, Annamaria Bianchi. 2020. Social Media and Twitter Data
Quality for New Social Indicators. Social Indicators Research 31. . [Crossref]
354. Rosa Scardigno, Giuseppe Mininni. 2020. The Rhetoric Side of Fake News: A New Weapon for AntiPolitics?. World Futures 76:2, 81-101. [Crossref]
355. Margaret Van Heekeren. 2020. The Curative Effect of Social Media on Fake News: A Historical Reevaluation. Journalism Studies 21:3, 306-318. [Crossref]
356. Benjamin D. Horne, Jeppe Nørregaard, Sibel Adali. 2020. Robust Fake News Detection Over Time
and Attack. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 11:1, 1-23. [Crossref]
357. Melanie Freeze, Mary Baumgartner, Peter Bruno, Jacob R. Gunderson, Joshua Olin, Morgan Quinn
Ross, Justine Szafran. 2020. Fake Claims of Fake News: Political Misinformation, Warnings, and the
Tainted Truth Effect. Political Behavior 31. . [Crossref]
358. Sumeet Kumar, Binxuan Huang, Ramon Alfonso Villa Cox, Kathleen M. Carley. 2020. An
anatomical comparison of fake-news and trusted-news sharing pattern on Twitter. Computational and
Mathematical Organization Theory 287. . [Crossref]
359. Feyza Altunbey Ozbay, Bilal Alatas. 2020. Fake news detection within online social media using
supervised artificial intelligence algorithms. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 540,
123174. [Crossref]
360. Graham G. Scott, Zara P. Brodie, Megan J. Wilson, Lucy Ivory, Christopher J. Hand, Sara C. Sereno.
2020. Celebrity abuse on Twitter: The impact of tweet valence, volume of abuse, and dark triad
personality factors on victim blaming and perceptions of severity. Computers in Human Behavior 103,
109-119. [Crossref]

361. Sean Sands, Colin Campbell, Carla Ferraro, Alexis Mavrommatis. 2020. Seeing light in the dark:
Investigating the dark side of social media and user response strategies. European Management Journal
38:1, 45-53. [Crossref]
362. Tinggui Chen, Qianqian Li, Peihua Fu, Jianjun Yang, Chonghuan Xu, Guodong Cong, Gongfa
Li. 2020. Public Opinion Polarization by Individual Revenue from the Social Preference Theory.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17:3, 946. [Crossref]
363. Sachin Kumar, Rohan Asthana, Shashwat Upadhyay, Nidhi Upreti, Mohammad Akbar. 2020.
Fake news detection using deep learning models: A novel approach. Transactions on Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies 31:2. . [Crossref]
364. Alicea Lieberman, Juliana Schroeder. 2020. Two social lives: How differences between online and
offline interaction influence social outcomes. Current Opinion in Psychology 31, 16-21. [Crossref]
365. Michael L. Barnett, Irene Henriques, Bryan W. Husted. 2020. The Rise and Stall of Stakeholder
Influence: How the Digital Age Limits Social Control. Academy of Management Perspectives 34:1,
48-64. [Crossref]
366. Oscar Barrera, Sergei Guriev, Emeric Henry, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2020. Facts, alternative facts,
and fact checking in times of post-truth politics. Journal of Public Economics 182, 104123. [Crossref]
367. Seonhee Yang. 2020. Reality and Challenges of Traditional Journalism in the Era of YouTube
Journalism. Journal of Social Science 31:1, 245-262. [Crossref]
368. Christopher Till. 2020. Propaganda through ‘reflexive control’ and the mediated construction of
reality. New Media & Society 4, 146144482090244. [Crossref]
369. Lei Guo, Jacob A. Rohde, H. Denis Wu. 2020. Who is responsible for Twitter’s echo chamber
problem? Evidence from 2016 U.S. election networks. Information, Communication & Society 23:2,
234-251. [Crossref]
370. Juan Francisco Sánchez Barrilao. 2020. El Internet en la era Trump: aproximación constitucional a
una nueva realidad. Estudios en Derecho a la Información 1:9, 49. [Crossref]
371. Reema Aswani, Arpan Kumar Kar, P. Vigneswara Ilavarasan. 2020. Experience. Journal of Data and
Information Quality 12:1, 1-18. [Crossref]
372. Francesco Pierri, Alessandro Artoni, Stefano Ceri. 2020. Investigating Italian disinformation spreading
on Twitter in the context of 2019 European elections. PLOS ONE 15:1, e0227821. [Crossref]
373. Louis‐Philippe Rondeau. Virtual Reality and Alternative Facts: The Subjective Realities of Digital
Communities 41-49. [Crossref]
374. Katherine Lynch, Shaunna Hunter. 2020. Conflicting authority. Reference Services Review ahead-ofprint:ahead-of-print. . [Crossref]
375. Luping Wang, Susan R. Fussell. 2020. More Than a Click. Proceedings of the ACM on HumanComputer Interaction 4:GROUP, 1-20. [Crossref]
376. Lauren A. Ricciardelli, Adam E. Quinn, Larry Nackerud. 2020. “Human behavior and the social
media environment”: group differences in social media attitudes and knowledge among U.S. social
work students. Social Work Education 31, 1-19. [Crossref]
377. Jianing Li. 2020. Toward a Research Agenda on Political Misinformation and Corrective Information.
Political Communication 37:1, 125-135. [Crossref]
378. Giselle Rampersad, Turki Althiyabi. 2020. Fake news: Acceptance by demographics and culture on
social media. Journal of Information Technology & Politics 17:1, 1-11. [Crossref]
379. Douglas Brommesson, Ann-Marie Ekengren. EU Foreign and Security Policy in a Mediatized Age
193-215. [Crossref]

380. Valesca Lima. Sustainable Citizenship and the Prospect of Participation and Governance in the Digital
Era 99-115. [Crossref]
381. Luis Terán. Discussion and Conclusions 133-143. [Crossref]
382. Georg Aichholzer, Gloria Rose. Experience with Digital Tools in Different Types of e-Participation
93-140. [Crossref]
383. Bernhard Lutz, Marc T. P. Adam, Stefan Feuerriegel, Nicolas Pröllochs, Dirk Neumann. Affective
Information Processing of Fake News: Evidence from NeuroIS 121-128. [Crossref]
384. Leona Hutchinson, Markus Appel. Die Psychologie des Gerüchts 157-166. [Crossref]
385. Umaru A. Pate, Adamkolo Mohammed Ibrahim. Fake News, Hate Speech and Nigeria's Struggle for
Democratic Consolidation 89-112. [Crossref]
386. Norbert Merkovity. Political Campaign Communication in the Information Age 166-180. [Crossref]
387. Katrina Kosec, Leonard Wantchekon. 2020. Can information improve rural governance and service
delivery?. World Development 125, 104376. [Crossref]
388. Des Freedman. Media and the Neoliberal Swindle: From ‘Fake News’ to ‘Public Service’ 215-231.
[Crossref]
389. Tomer Tuchner, Gail Gilboa-Freedman. Crying “Wolf ” in a Network Structure: The Influence of
Node-Generated Signals 301-312. [Crossref]
390. Stefano Guarino, Noemi Trino, Alessandro Chessa, Gianni Riotta. Beyond Fact-Checking: Network
Analysis Tools for Monitoring Disinformation in Social Media 436-447. [Crossref]
391. Paul R. Carr, Michelli Aparecida Daros, Sandra Liliana Cuervo Liliana Cuervo, Gina Thésée. Social
Media and the Quest for Democracy 1-24. [Crossref]
392. Brian Robert Calfano. 2020. Government-Corroborated Conspiracies: Motivating Response to (and
Belief in) a Coordinated Crime. PS: Political Science & Politics 53:1, 64-71. [Crossref]
393. Evan Sadler. 2020. Diffusion Games. American Economic Review 110:1, 225-270. [Abstract] [View
PDF article] [PDF with links]
394. Tarek Hamdi, Hamda Slimi, Ibrahim Bounhas, Yahya Slimani. A Hybrid Approach for Fake News
Detection in Twitter Based on User Features and Graph Embedding 266-280. [Crossref]
395. Theresa Davidson, Lee Farquhar. Prejudice and Social Media: Attitudes Toward Illegal Immigrants,
Refugees, and Transgender People 151-167. [Crossref]
396. Andreas Kaplan, Michael Haenlein. 2020. Rulers of the world, unite! The challenges and
opportunities of artificial intelligence. Business Horizons 63:1, 37-50. [Crossref]
397. Carsten Hartmann. Gefangen in der Filterblase? 45-62. [Crossref]
398. Jozef Kapusta, Ľubomír Benko, Michal Munk. Fake News Identification Based on Sentiment and
Frequency Analysis 400-409. [Crossref]
399. Xiangtong Meng, Wei Zhang, Youwei Li, Xing Cao, Xu Feng. 2020. Social media effect, investor
recognition and the cross-section of stock returns. International Review of Financial Analysis 67,
101432. [Crossref]
400. Samuel Kai Wah Chu. Review of Social Media 13-29. [Crossref]
401. Paul R. Carr, Michelli Aparecida Daros, Sandra Liliana Cuervo, Gina Thésée. Social Media and the
Quest for Democracy 1-24. [Crossref]
402. Arghya Ray, Pradip Kumar Bala. 2020. Social media for improved process management in
organizations during disasters. Knowledge and Process Management 27:1, 63-74. [Crossref]
403. Christian Stöcker. How Facebook and Google Accidentally Created a Perfect Ecosystem for Targeted
Disinformation 129-149. [Crossref]

404. Kelechi Okechukwu Amakoh. Maintaining Journalistic Authority 168-181. [Crossref]
405. Amir Forouharfar. Cyber-tech Companies and Public Mind Control 1-7. [Crossref]
406. Xingyu Chen, John Yu, Pamela Goh, Loo Seng Neo, Verity Er, Majeed Khader. Crime-Fake News
Nexus 52-65. [Crossref]
407. Antonio Badia. An Overview (and Criticism) of Methods to Detect Fake Content Online 1053-1061.
[Crossref]
408. Rofhiwa F. Mukhudwana. #Zuma Must Fall This February: Homophily on the Echo-Chambers of
Political Leaders’ Twitter Accounts 175-202. [Crossref]
409. Cornelius Puschmann. Technische Faktoren bei der Verbreitung propagandistischer Inhalte im
Internet und den sozialen Medien 539-549. [Crossref]
410. Yongtian Yu, Guang Yu, Tong Li, Qingli Man, Qiuping Chen. 2020. Quantitative Characterization
and Identification of the Company-Related Disinformation Channel Among Media. IEEE Access 8,
29196-29204. [Crossref]
411. Elmie Nekmat. 2020. Nudge Effect of Fact-Check Alerts: Source Influence and Media Skepticism
on Sharing of News Misinformation in Social Media. Social Media + Society 6:1, 205630511989732.
[Crossref]
412. SeongKu Kang, Junyoung Hwang, Hwanjo Yu. Multi-Modal Component Embedding for Fake News
Detection 1-6. [Crossref]
413. Emerson Yoshiaki Okano, Zebin Liu, Donghong Ji, Evandro Eduardo Seron Ruiz. Fake News
Detection on Fake.Br Using Hierarchical Attention Networks 143-152. [Crossref]
414. Gabriela Wick-Pedro, Roney L. S. Santos, Oto A. Vale, Thiago A. S. Pardo, Kalina Bontcheva,
Carolina Scarton. Linguistic Analysis Model for Monitoring User Reaction on Satirical News for
Brazilian Portuguese 313-320. [Crossref]
415. Jan-Erik Lönnqvist, Ville-Juhani Ilmarinen, Florencia M. Sortheix. 2020. Polarization in the wake
of the European refugee crisis – A longitudinal study of the Finnish political elite’s attitudes towards
refugees and the environment. Journal of Social and Political Psychology 8:1, 173-197. [Crossref]
416. Sho Tsugawa. 2020. ##############. IEICE Communications Society Magazine 13:4, 282-288.
[Crossref]
417. S. Jalil Kazemitabar, Arash A. Amini. Approximate Identification of the Optimal Epidemic Source
in Complex Networks 107-125. [Crossref]
418. Shawyn C. Lee. 26. [Crossref]
419. Carola Binder. 2020. Coronavirus Fears and Macroeconomic Expectations. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
420. Stanislaw P. Stawicki, Michael S. Firstenberg, Thomas J. Papadimos. The Growing Role of Social
Media in International Health Security: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly 341-357. [Crossref]
421. Freek van Gils, Wieland Müller, Jens Prufer. 2020. Big Data and Democracy. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
422. Marialaura Previti, Victor Rodriguez-Fernandez, David Camacho, Vincenza Carchiolo, Michele
Malgeri. Fake News Detection Using Time Series and User Features Classification 339-353. [Crossref]
423. Daniel A. Effron, Medha Raj. 2020. Misinformation and Morality: Encountering Fake-News
Headlines Makes Them Seem Less Unethical to Publish and Share. Psychological Science 31:1, 75-87.
[Crossref]
424. Paul Machete, Marita Turpin. The Use of Critical Thinking to Identify Fake News: A Systematic
Literature Review 235-246. [Crossref]

425. Anmol Uppal, Vipul Sachdeva, Seema Sharma. Fake news detection using discourse segment structure
analysis 751-756. [Crossref]
426. Braulio Andres Soncco Pimentel, Roxana L. Q. Portugal. Fake News in Spanish: Towards the Building
of a Corpus Based on Twitter 333-339. [Crossref]
427. Fedyukovsky Alexander. 2020. False messages in scientific publics using the example of Russian social
network Vkontakte. E3S Web of Conferences 164, 12005. [Crossref]
428. Wasim Ahmed, Josep Vidal-Alaball, Joseph Downing, Francesc López Seguí. 2020. COVID-19 and
the 5G Conspiracy Theory: Social Network Analysis of Twitter Data. Journal of Medical Internet
Research 22:5, e19458. [Crossref]
429. Joan Balcells, Albert Padró-Solanet. 2020. Crossing Lines in the Twitter Debate on Catalonia’s
Independence. The International Journal of Press/Politics 25:1, 28-52. [Crossref]
430. Juan S. Morales. 2020. Perceived Popularity and Online Political Dissent: Evidence from Twitter in
Venezuela. The International Journal of Press/Politics 25:1, 5-27. [Crossref]
431. Mark Chong, Murphy Choy. An Empirically Supported Taxonomy of Misinformation 117-138.
[Crossref]
432. Mehmet Fatih Çömlekçi. Combating Fake News Online 273-289. [Crossref]
433. Heitor Pasquim, Marcos Oliveira, Cássia Baldini Soares. 2020. Fake news sobre drogas: pós-verdade
e desinformação. Saúde e Sociedade 29:2. . [Crossref]
434. Oliver James, Asmus Leth Olsen, Donald Moynihan, Gregg G. Van Ryzin. . [Crossref]
435. Enrique Muriel-Torrado, Danielle Borges Pereira. Relations Between the Concepts of Disinformation
and the Fogg Behavior Model 147-163. [Crossref]
436. Andrea Hrckova, Robert Moro, Ivan Srba, Maria Bielikova. Examining the Linking Patterns and
Link Building Strategies of Mainstream and Partisan Online News Media in Central Europe 133-146.
[Crossref]
437. Julian Bühler, Matthias Murawski, Mahdieh Darvish, Markus Bick. Developing a Model to Measure
Fake News Detection Literacy of Social Media Users 213-227. [Crossref]
438. Juan Cao, Peng Qi, Qiang Sheng, Tianyun Yang, Junbo Guo, Jintao Li. Exploring the Role of Visual
Content in Fake News Detection 141-161. [Crossref]
439. Kunwoo Park, Taegyun Kim, Seunghyun Yoon, Meeyoung Cha, Kyomin Jung. BaitWatcher: A
Lightweight Web Interface for the Detection of Incongruent News Headlines 229-252. [Crossref]
440. Thami Ghorfi, Imad-eddine Hatimi. Impact of Social Media Usage on MENA Countries Economy
77-99. [Crossref]
441. Paul R. Carr, Michelli Aparecida Daros, Sandra Liliana Cuervo, Gina Thésée. Social Media and the
Quest for Democracy 441-464. [Crossref]
442. Peter Arthur. Disruptive Technologies, Democracy, Governance and National Elections in Africa:
Back to the Future? 17-38. [Crossref]
443. Fadi Safieddine, Rawad Hammad. Fake News 103-121. [Crossref]
444. Abbas Moallem. Trust in News and Information in Social Media 129-134. [Crossref]
445. Liza Potts, Stephanie Mahnke. Subverting the Platform Flexibility of Twitter to Spread
Misinformation 157-172. [Crossref]
446. Eugène Loos, Jordy Nijenhuis. Consuming Fake News: A Matter of Age? The Perception of Political
Fake News Stories in Facebook Ads 69-88. [Crossref]
447. Eliana Providel, Marcelo Mendoza. Using Deep Learning to Detect Rumors in Twitter 321-334.
[Crossref]

448. Paul R. Carr, Sandra Liliana Cuervo Sanchez, Michelli Aparecida Daros. 2020. Citizen Engagement
in the Contemporary Era of Fake News: Hegemonic Distraction or Control of the Social Media
Context?. Postdigital Science and Education 2:1, 39-60. [Crossref]
449. Hadas Emma Kedar. 2020. Fake News in Media Art: Fake News as a Media Art Practice Vs. Fake
News in Politics. Postdigital Science and Education 2:1, 132-146. [Crossref]
450. Giancarlo Fedeli. 2020. ‘Fake news’ meets tourism: a proposed research agenda. Annals of Tourism
Research 80, 102684. [Crossref]
451. Milan Zafirovski. 2020. Indicators of Militarism and Democracy in Comparative Context: How
Militaristic Tendencies Influence Democratic Processes in OECD Countries 2010–2016. Social
Indicators Research 147:1, 159-202. [Crossref]
452. Terry Flew. 2020. Trust and the Future Sustainability of News: The Collapse of Traditional
Newsrooms and the Rise of Subscriber-Funded News Media. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
453. M. Abouei Mehrizi, Gianlorenzo D’Angelo. Multi-winner Election Control via Social Influence
331-348. [Crossref]
454. Andrey Simonov, Szymon Sacher, Jean-Pierre H. Dube, Shirsho Biswas. 2020. The Persuasive
Effect of Fox News: Non-Compliance with Social Distancing During the Covid-19 Pandemic. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
455. Andrey Simonov, Szymon Sacher, Jean-Pierre H. Dube, Shirsho Biswas. 2020. The Persuasive Effect
of Fox News: Non-Compliance with Social Distancing During the COVID-19 Pandemic. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
456. Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman. 2020. COVID-19-Related Fake News in Social Media. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
457. Charles Angelucci, Andrea Prat. 2020. Measuring Voters' Knowledge of Political News. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
458. Nahema Marchal. 2020. Conceptualizing the Impact of Digital Interference in Elections: A Framework
and Agenda for Future Research. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
459. Heini I. Skorini. Science as a Political Battlefield 29-53. [Crossref]
460. Thomas Koch, Nora Denner. Fake News als Gefahr für die öffentliche Meinung? 73-90. [Crossref]
461. Mohammad Abouei Mehrizi, Federico Corò, Emilio Cruciani, Gianlorenzo D’Angelo. Election
Control Through Social Influence with Unknown Preferences 397-410. [Crossref]
462. Łukasz Kwaśniewicz, Grzegorz M. Wójcik, Andrzej Kawiak, Piotr Schneider, Adam Wierzbicki. How
You Say or What You Say? Neural Activity in Message Credibility Evaluation 312-326. [Crossref]
463. Andrzej Kawiak, Grzegorz M. Wójcik, Lukasz Kwasniewicz, Piotr Schneider, Adam Wierzbicki. Look
Who’s Talking: Modeling Decision Making Based on Source Credibility 327-341. [Crossref]
464. Sandra González-Bailón, Michael Xenos. 2020. Surveys Underestimate Online News Exposure: A
Comparison of Self-Reported and Observational Data in Nine Countries. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
465. Julio Cesar Lemes de Castro. 2020. Máquinas de guerra híbrida em plataformas algorítmicas (Hybrid
War Machines on Algorithmic Platforms). SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
466. Natasha Omezi, Hamid Jahankhani. Proposed Forensic Guidelines for the Investigation of Fake News
231-265. [Crossref]
467. Christopher Whyte. 2020. Cyber conflict or democracy “hacked”? How cyber operations enhance
information warfare. Journal of Cybersecurity 6:1. . [Crossref]
468. Lixuan Ding, Lanting Ding, Richard O. Sinnott. Fake News Classification of Social Media Through
Sentiment Analysis 52-67. [Crossref]

469. Mohamed K. Elhadad, Kin Fun Li, Fayez Gebali. 2020. Detecting Misleading Information on
COVID-19. IEEE Access 8, 165201-165215. [Crossref]
470. Jacqui Taylor-Jackson, Sophie Matthews. The Influence of Traits Associated with Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) on the Detection of Fake News 464-472. [Crossref]
471. Francesca Spezzano, Indhumathi Gurunathan. Protecting the Web from Misinformation 1-27.
[Crossref]
472. Martin Oliver. 2020. Infrastructure and the Post-Truth Era: is Trump Twitter’s Fault?. Postdigital
Science and Education 2:1, 17-38. [Crossref]
473. Curd Knüpfer. Medien 317-332. [Crossref]
474. Tobias Konitzer, Jennifer Allen, Stephanie Eckman, Baird Howland, Markus M. Mobius, David M.
Rothschild, Duncan Watts. 2020. Measuring News Consumption With Behavioral Versus Survey
Data. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
475. Thanh Cong Truong, Quoc Bao Diep, Ivan Zelinka, Roman Senkerik. Supervised Classification
Methods for Fake News Identification 445-454. [Crossref]
476. Leonie Schaewitz, Nicole C. Krämer. Combating Disinformation: Effects of Timing and Correction
Format on Factual Knowledge and Personal Beliefs 233-245. [Crossref]
477. Doowon Jeong. 2020. Artificial Intelligence Security Threat, Crime, and Forensics: Taxonomy and
Open Issues. IEEE Access 8, 184560-184574. [Crossref]
478. Bernhard Lutz, Marc T. P. Adam, Stefan Feuerriegel, Nicolas Pröllochs, Dirk Neumann. Identifying
Linguistic Cues of Fake News Associated with Cognitive and Affective Processing: Evidence from
NeuroIS 16-23. [Crossref]
479. Angela Theresa Zuffo Yabrude, Andressa Caroline Martins de Souza, Catarine Wiggers de Campos,
Loyse Bohn, Marcela Tiboni. 2020. Desafios das Fake News com Idosos durante Infodemia sobre
Covid-19: Experiência de Estudantes de Medicina. Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica 44:suppl 1. .
[Crossref]
480. Leonardo Bursztyn, Ingar Haaland, Aakaash Rao, Christopher Roth. 2020. I Have Nothing Against
Them, But…. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
481. Eduardo C. Garrido-Merchán, Cristina Puente, Rafael Palacios. Fake News Detection by Means of
Uncertainty Weighted Causal Graphs 13-24. [Crossref]
482. Leonardo Madio, Martin Quinn. 2020. User-Generated Content, Strategic Moderation, and
Advertising. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
483. Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou. 2020. The Political Economy of Populism. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
484. Junxiao Xue, Yabo Wang, Shuning Xu, Lei Shi, Lin Wei, Huawei Song. MVFNN: Multi-Vision
Fusion Neural Network for Fake News Picture Detection 112-119. [Crossref]
485. Valentin Matei, Alexandru Pavel, Ana Giurgiuca, Alina Roșca, Arina Sofia, Irina Duțu, Cătălina
Tudose. 2020. <p>Knowledge of Prevention Measures and Information About Coronavirus in
Romanian Male Patients with Severe Mental Illness and Severe Alcohol Use Disorder</p>.
Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment Volume 16, 2857-2864. [Crossref]
486. Enrique MURIEL-TORRADO, Danielle Borges PEREIRA. 2020. Correlations between the
concepts of disinformation and Fogg’s Behavior Model. Transinformação 32. . [Crossref]
487. Christophe Maze, Arthur Haye, Joshua Sarre, Michel Galaup, Pierre Lagarrigue, Catherine Pons
Lelardeux. A Board Game to Fight Against Misinformation and Fake News 326-334. [Crossref]

488. Giuseppe Sansonetti, Fabio Gasparetti, Giuseppe D'aniello, Alessandro Micarelli. 2020. Unreliable
Users Detection in Social Media: Deep Learning Techniques for Automatic Detection. IEEE Access
8, 213154-213167. [Crossref]
489. Yida Mu, Nikolaos Aletras. 2020. Identifying Twitter users who repost unreliable news sources with
linguistic information. PeerJ Computer Science 6, e325. [Crossref]
490. Thomas Fujiwara, Karsten Müller, Carlo Schwarz. 2020. The Effect of Social Media on Elections:
Evidence from the United States. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
491. Lin Peng, Linyi Zhang. 2020. Social Ties and Peer Effects in Crowdfunding Markets. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
492. Nan Sun, Jun Zhang, Shang Gao, Leo Yu Zhang, Seyit Camtepe, Yang Xiang. Data Analytics of
Crowdsourced Resources for Cybersecurity Intelligence 3-21. [Crossref]
493. Line van den Berg, Malvin Gattinger. Dealing with Unreliable Agents in Dynamic Gossip 51-67.
[Crossref]
494. Lauren A. Ricciardelli, Larry Nackerud, Adam E. Quinn, Mary Sewell, Beatrice Casiano. 2020. Social
media use, attitudes, and knowledge among social work students: Ethical implications for the social
work profession. Social Sciences & Humanities Open 2:1, 100008. [Crossref]
495. Chunhong Shi, Zhihua Guo, Chan Luo, Changbin Lei, Pan Li. 2020. The Psychological Impact
and Associated Factors of COVID-19 on the General Public in Hunan, China. Risk Management and
Healthcare Policy Volume 13, 3187-3199. [Crossref]
496. Julien Figeac, Tristan Salord, Guillaume Cabanac, Ophélie Fraisier, Pierre Ratinaud, Fanny Seffusatti,
Nikos Smyrnaios. 2019. Facebook favorise-t-il la désinformation et la polarisation idéologique des
opinions ?. Questions de communication :36, 167-187. [Crossref]
497. Scott Clifford, Yongkwang Kim, Brian W Sullivan. 2019. An Improved Question Format for
Measuring Conspiracy Beliefs. Public Opinion Quarterly 83:4, 690-722. [Crossref]
498. Violetta Wilk, Geoffrey Norman Soutar, Paul Harrigan. 2019. Online brand advocacy (OBA): the
development of a multiple item scale. Journal of Product & Brand Management 29:4, 415-429.
[Crossref]
499. Francesco Pierri, Stefano Ceri. 2019. False News On Social Media. ACM SIGMOD Record 48:2,
18-27. [Crossref]
500. Beata Kacperska, Mateusz Markowski, Maria Migodzińska. 2019. Kreatywność językowa polityków
polskich, niemieckich i amerykańskich na Twitterze w okresie kampanii wyborczych w 2018 roku –
wybrane zagadnienia. Acta Universitatis Lodziensis. Folia Librorum 2:29, 119-138. [Crossref]
501. Jonas C. L. Valente. 2019. Regulando desinformação e fake news: um panorama internacional das
respostas ao problema. Comunicação pública :Vol.14 nº 27. . [Crossref]
502. Michael Guerzhoy, Lisa Zhang, Georgy Noarov. 2019. AI education matters. AI Matters 5:3, 18-20.
[Crossref]
503. M. Laeeq Khan, Ika Karlina Idris. 2019. Recognise misinformation and verify before sharing: a
reasoned action and information literacy perspective. Behaviour & Information Technology 38:12,
1194-1212. [Crossref]
504. Arash Barfar. 2019. Cognitive and affective responses to political disinformation in Facebook.
Computers in Human Behavior 101, 173-179. [Crossref]
505. Ofir Turel, Oren Gil-Or. 2019. To share or not to share? The roles of false Facebook self, sex, and
narcissism in re-posting self-image enhancing products. Personality and Individual Differences 151,
109506. [Crossref]
506. Jennifer K. Boland, Jaime L. Anderson. 2019. The role of personality psychopathology in social
network site behaviors. Personality and Individual Differences 151, 109517. [Crossref]

507. Ahmed Al-Rawi. 2019. Gatekeeping Fake News Discourses on Mainstream Media Versus Social
Media. Social Science Computer Review 37:6, 687-704. [Crossref]
508. M. Connor Sullivan. 2019. Why librarians can’t fight fake news. Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science 51:4, 1146-1156. [Crossref]
509. Simon Lindgren. 2019. Movement Mobilization in the Age of Hashtag Activism: Examining the
Challenge of Noise, Hate, and Disengagement in the #MeToo Campaign. Policy & Internet 11:4,
418-438. [Crossref]
510. Aki Koivula, Markus Kaakinen, Atte Oksanen, Pekka Räsänen. 2019. The Role of Political Activity
in the Formation of Online Identity Bubbles. Policy & Internet 11:4, 396-417. [Crossref]
511. Lisa K Hartley, Joel R Anderson, Anne Pedersen. 2019. Process in the Community, Detain Offshore
or ‘Turn Back the Boats’? Predicting Australian Asylum-seeker Policy Support from False Beliefs,
Prejudice and Political Ideology. Journal of Refugee Studies 32:4, 562-582. [Crossref]
512. Yonghun Jang, Chang-Hyeon Park, Yeong-Seok Seo. 2019. Fake News Analysis Modeling Using
Quote Retweet. Electronics 8:12, 1377. [Crossref]
513. Kjell Hausken. 2019. A Game Theoretic Model of Adversaries and Media Manipulation. Games 10:4,
48. [Crossref]
514. Wei Wang, Yuanhui Ma, Tao Wu, Yang Dai, Xingshu Chen, Lidia A. Braunstein. 2019. Containing
misinformation spreading in temporal social networks. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear
Science 29:12, 123131. [Crossref]
515. Milan Zafirovski. 2019. Exploitation in contemporary societies: An exploratory comparative analysis.
The Social Science Journal 56:4, 565-587. [Crossref]
516. Alberto Acerbi. 2019. Cognitive attraction and online misinformation. Palgrave Communications 5:1. .
[Crossref]
517. Peiyi Wang, Lixia Deng, Xiujun Wu. An Automated Fact Checking System Using Deep Learning
Through Word Embedding 3246-3250. [Crossref]
518. Prush Sa-nga-ngam, Theeraya Mayakul, Wasin Srisawat, Supaporn Kiattisin. Fake news and online
disinformation. a perspectives of Thai government officials 1-4. [Crossref]
519. Ammara Habib, Muhammad Zubair Asghar, Adil Khan, Anam Habib, Aurangzeb Khan. 2019. False
information detection in online content and its role in decision making: a systematic literature review.
Social Network Analysis and Mining 9:1. . [Crossref]
520. Dorje C. Brody. 2019. Modelling election dynamics and the impact of disinformation. Information
Geometry 2:2, 209-230. [Crossref]
521. Abhishek Samantray, Paolo Pin. 2019. Credibility of climate change denial in social media. Palgrave
Communications 5:1. . [Crossref]
522. J. Piet Hausberg, Kirsten Liere-Netheler, Sven Packmohr, Stefanie Pakura, Kristin Vogelsang. 2019.
Research streams on digital transformation from a holistic business perspective: a systematic literature
review and citation network analysis. Journal of Business Economics 89:8-9, 931-963. [Crossref]
523. Joohyun Oh, Jeong-han Kang. 2019. Converting a digital minority into a digital beneficiary: Digital
skills to improve the need for cognition among Korean older adults. Information Development 28,
026666691988857. [Crossref]
524. Ekatherina Zhukova. 2019. Image substitutes and visual fake history: historical images of atrocity
of the Ukrainian famine 1932–1933 on social media. Visual Communication 13, 147035721988867.
[Crossref]
525. Teng-Chieh Huang, Razieh Nokhbeh Zaeem, K. Suzanne Barber. 2019. It Is an Equal Failing to Trust
Everybody and to Trust Nobody. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 19:4, 1-20. [Crossref]

526. Joshua Habgood-Coote. 2019. Stop talking about fake news!. Inquiry 62:9-10, 1033-1065. [Crossref]
527. Rafael Angarita, Bruno Lefèvre, Shohreh Ahvar, Ehsan Ahvar, Nikolaos Georgantas, Valérie Issarny.
2019. Universal Social Network Bus. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 19:3, 1-19. [Crossref]
528. Kevin C. Elliott. 2019. Science Journalism, Value Judgments, and the Open Science Movement.
Frontiers in Communication 4. . [Crossref]
529. Kirsten J. Worden. 2019. Disengagement in the Digital Age: A Virtue Ethical Approach to Epistemic
Sorting on Social Media. Moral Philosophy and Politics 6:2, 235-259. [Crossref]
530. Alon Sela, Orit Milo, Eugene Kagan, Irad Ben-Gal. 2019. Improving information spread by spreading
groups. Online Information Review 44:1, 24-42. [Crossref]
531. Abhijnan Chakraborty, Niloy Ganguly. 2019. Online Social Networks to Foster Long-Term Welfare.
GetMobile: Mobile Computing and Communications 23:2, 5-8. [Crossref]
532. Edda Humprecht. 2019. Where ‘fake news’ flourishes: a comparison across four Western democracies.
Information, Communication & Society 22:13, 1973-1988. [Crossref]
533. Glenda N. Cooper. Looking Back to Go Forward: The Ethics of Journalism in a Social Media Age
411-425. [Crossref]
534. Ricardo Martins, José João Almeida, Pedro Henriques, Paulo Novais. 2019. A sentiment analysis
approach to increase authorship identification. Expert Systems 6. . [Crossref]
535. Shagun Jhaver, Darren Scott Appling, Eric Gilbert, Amy Bruckman. 2019. "Did You Suspect the
Post Would be Removed?". Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3:CSCW, 1-33.
[Crossref]
536. Shalini Talwar, Amandeep Dhir, Puneet Kaur, Nida Zafar, Melfi Alrasheedy. 2019. Why do people
share fake news? Associations between the dark side of social media use and fake news sharing behavior.
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 51, 72-82. [Crossref]
537. Robert A Thomson, Jerry Z Park, Diana Kendall. 2019. Religious Conservatives and TV News: Are
They More Likely to be Religiously Offended?. Social Problems 66:4, 626-644. [Crossref]
538. Mohammad Ahsan, Madhu Kumari, T.P. Sharma. 2019. Rumors detection, verification and
controlling mechanisms in online social networks: A survey. Online Social Networks and Media 14,
100050. [Crossref]
539. Henrik Skaug Sætra. 2019. The tyranny of perceived opinion: Freedom and information in the era
of big data. Technology in Society 59, 101155. [Crossref]
540. Irfan Kareem, Shahid Mahmood Awan. Pakistani Media Fake News Classification using Machine
Learning Classifiers 1-6. [Crossref]
541. Peng Qi, Juan Cao, Tianyun Yang, Junbo Guo, Jintao Li. Exploiting Multi-domain Visual
Information for Fake News Detection 518-527. [Crossref]
542. Ahmed Abouzeid, Ole.Christoffer Granmo, Christian Webersik, Morten Goodwin. Causality-based
Social Media Analysis for Normal Users Credibility Assessment in a Political Crisis 3-14. [Crossref]
543. Colin C Barton. 2019. Critical Literacy in the Post-Truth Media Landscape. Policy Futures in
Education 17:8, 1024-1036. [Crossref]
544. Belhakimi Mohamed Amine, Ahlem Drif, Silvia Giordano. Merging deep learning model for fake
news detection 1-4. [Crossref]
545. Rachel R. Mourão, Craig T. Robertson. 2019. Fake News as Discursive Integration: An Analysis of
Sites That Publish False, Misleading, Hyperpartisan and Sensational Information. Journalism Studies
20:14, 2077-2095. [Crossref]

546. Maria D. Molina, S. Shyam Sundar, Thai Le, Dongwon Lee. 2019. “Fake News” Is Not Simply False
Information: A Concept Explication and Taxonomy of Online Content. American Behavioral Scientist
20, 000276421987822. [Crossref]
547. Brian J. Bowe. 2019. Separating real from fake: Building news literacy with the Frayer Model.
Communication Teacher 33:4, 256-261. [Crossref]
548. Scott R. Stroud. 2019. Pragmatist Media Ethics and the Challenges of Fake News. Journal of Media
Ethics 34:4, 178-192. [Crossref]
549. Carolyn A. Lin. 2019. The Challenge of Information and Communication Divides in the Age of
Disruptive Technology. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 63:4, 587-594. [Crossref]
550. Lyton Ncube. 2019. Digital Media, Fake News and Pro-Movement for Democratic Change (MDC)
Alliance Cyber-Propaganda during the 2018 Zimbabwe Election. African Journalism Studies 40:4,
44-61. [Crossref]
551. Cecilia Strand, Jakob Svensson. 2019. “Fake News” on Sexual Minorities is “Old News”: A Study
of Digital Platforms as Spaces for Challenging Inaccurate Reporting on Ugandan Sexual Minorities.
African Journalism Studies 40:4, 77-95. [Crossref]
552. Richard Gunther, Paul A. Beck, Erik C. Nisbet. 2019. “Fake news” and the defection of 2012 Obama
voters in the 2016 presidential election. Electoral Studies 61, 102030. [Crossref]
553. Satish Nambisan, Mike Wright, Maryann Feldman. 2019. The digital transformation of innovation
and entrepreneurship: Progress, challenges and key themes. Research Policy 48:8, 103773. [Crossref]
554. Muhannad Alsyouf, Phillip Stokes, Dan Hur, Akin Amasyali, Herbert Ruckle, Brian Hu. 2019.
‘Fake News’ in urology: evaluating the accuracy of articles shared on social media in genitourinary
malignancies. BJU International 124:4, 701-706. [Crossref]
555. Stefanie K. Gratale, Angeline Sangalang, Erin K. Maloney, Joseph N. Cappella. 2019. Attitudinal
Spillover from Misleading Natural Cigarette Marketing: An Experiment Examining Current and
Former Smokers’ Support for Tobacco Industry Regulation. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 16:19, 3554. [Crossref]
556. Anatoly P. Chudinov, Natalya N. Koshkarova, Natalia B. Ruzhentseva. 2019. Linguistic Interpretation
of Russian Political Agenda Through Fake, Deepfake, Post-Truth. Journal of Siberian Federal
University. Humanities & Social Sciences 1840-1853. [Crossref]
557. Pedro Faustini, Thiago Ferreira Covoes. Fake News Detection Using One-Class Classification
592-597. [Crossref]
558. Camila Leite da Silva, Lucas May Petry, Vinicius Marino Calvo Torres de Freitas, Carina Friedrich
Dorneles. Mining Journals to the Ground: An Exploratory Analysis of Newspaper Articles 78-83.
[Crossref]
559. Ralph Schroeder. 2019. Digital Media and the Entrenchment of Right-Wing Populist Agendas. Social
Media + Society 5:4, 205630511988532. [Crossref]
560. Darren L. Linvill, Brandon C. Boatwright, Will J. Grant, Patrick L. Warren. 2019. “THE RUSSIANS
ARE HACKING MY BRAIN!” investigating Russia's internet research agency twitter tactics during
the 2016 United States presidential campaign. Computers in Human Behavior 99, 292-300. [Crossref]
561. Ethar Qawasmeh, Mais Tawalbeh, Malak Abdullah. Automatic Identification of Fake News Using
Deep Learning 383-388. [Crossref]
562. Anav Bedi, Nitin Pandey, Sunil Kumar Khatri. A Framework to Identify and secure the Issues of Fake
News and Rumours in Social Networking 70-73. [Crossref]
563. Dwi Fitri Brianna, Edi Surya Negara, Yesi Novaria Kunang. Network Centralization Analysis
Approach in the Spread of Hoax News on Social Media 303-308. [Crossref]

564. Natalie Jomini Stroud, Ashley Muddiman. 2019. Social Media Engagement With Strategy- and IssueFramed Political News. Journal of Communication 69:5, 443-466. [Crossref]
565. R Kelly Garrett, Jacob A Long, Min Seon Jeong. 2019. From Partisan Media to Misperception:
Affective Polarization as Mediator. Journal of Communication 69:5, 490-512. [Crossref]
566. Paniagua, Rivelles, Sapena. 2019. Social Determinants of Success: Social Media, Corporate
Governance and Revenue. Sustainability 11:19, 5164. [Crossref]
567. Chen, Li, Yang, Cong, Li. 2019. Modeling of the Public Opinion Polarization Process with
the Considerations of Individual Heterogeneity and Dynamic Conformity. Mathematics 7:10, 917.
[Crossref]
568. Ethan Porter, Thomas J. Wood. False Alarm 81, . [Crossref]
569. Brian E. Weeks, Homero Gil de Zúñiga. 2019. What’s Next? Six Observations for the Future of
Political Misinformation Research. American Behavioral Scientist 000276421987823. [Crossref]
570. Ján Mazúr, Mária T. Patakyová. 2019. Regulatory Approaches to Facebook and Other Social
Media Platforms: Towards Platforms Design Accountability. Masaryk University Journal of Law and
Technology 13:2, 219. [Crossref]
571. Ajnesh Prasad. 2019. Denying Anthropogenic Climate Change: Or, How Our Rejection of Objective
Reality Gave Intellectual Legitimacy to Fake News. Sociological Forum 44. . [Crossref]
572. Kristen Lane, Sidney J. Levy. Marketing in the Digital Age: A Moveable Feast of Information 13-33.
[Crossref]
573. Mona S Kleinberg, Richard R Lau. 2019. The Importance of Political Knowledge for Effective
Citizenship. Public Opinion Quarterly 83:2, 338-362. [Crossref]
574. Jennifer M. Connolly, Joseph E. Uscinski, Casey A. Klofstad, Jonathan P. West. 2019.
Communicating to the Public in the Era of Conspiracy Theory. Public Integrity 21:5, 469-476.
[Crossref]
575. Michael Landon-Murray, Edin Mujkic, Brian Nussbaum. 2019. Disinformation in Contemporary
U.S. Foreign Policy: Impacts and Ethics in an Era of Fake News, Social Media, and Artificial
Intelligence. Public Integrity 21:5, 512-522. [Crossref]
576. Bonnie Stabile, Aubrey Grant, Hemant Purohit, Kelsey Harris. 2019. Sex, Lies, and Stereotypes:
Gendered Implications of Fake News for Women in Politics. Public Integrity 21:5, 491-502. [Crossref]
577. Subin Sudhir, Anandakuttan B. Unnithan. 2019. Role of affect in marketplace rumor propagation.
Marketing Intelligence & Planning 37:6, 631-644. [Crossref]
578. Nora Kreyßig, Agnieszka Ewa Krautz. 2019. Lying and perception of lies by bilingual speakers. Applied
Psycholinguistics 40:05, 1313-1329. [Crossref]
579. Alan F. Smeaton. Challenges Associated with Generative Forms of Multimedia Content (Keynote
Talk) 1-3. [Crossref]
580. Indra Gamayanto, De Rosal Igantius Moses Setiadi, Muljono Muljono, Sasono Wibowo, Rizka
Nugraha Pratikna, Arta Moro Sundjaja, Clara Hetty, Devi Purnamasari. The Concept of “Anti-Hoax
Intelligence (CI1)” Inside Social Media using Ken Watanabe & Johari Window Methods 528-535.
[Crossref]
581. Adi Prasetyo, Bayu Dwi Septianto, Guruh Fajar Shidik, Ahmad Zainul Fanani. Evaluation of Feature
Extraction TF-IDF in Indonesian Hoax News Classification 1-6. [Crossref]
582. Ngo Van Long, Martin Richardson, Frank Stähler. 2019. Media, fake news, and debunking. Economic
Record 95:310, 312-324. [Crossref]
583. Andrew Duffy. 2019. Narrative Matters: You do you: teens’ coconstruction of narrative, reality and
identity on social media. Child and Adolescent Mental Health 24:3, 288-290. [Crossref]

584. Edson C. Tandoc. 2019. The facts of fake news: A research review. Sociology Compass 13:9. . [Crossref]
585. Jonathan Intravia, Justin T. Pickett. 2019. Stereotyping Online? Internet News, Social Media, and
the Racial Typification of Crime. Sociological Forum 34:3, 616-642. [Crossref]
586. Jeremy Kepner, Kenjiro Cho, KC Claffy, Vijay Gadepally, Peter Michaleas, Lauren Milechin.
Hypersparse Neural Network Analysis of Large-Scale Internet Traffic 1-11. [Crossref]
587. Daniel Vial, Vijay Subramanian. Local Non-Bayesian Social Learning with Stubborn Agents *
902-903. [Crossref]
588. Shivangi Singhal, Rajiv Ratn Shah, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, Shin'ichi
Satoh. SpotFake: A Multi-modal Framework for Fake News Detection 39-47. [Crossref]
589. Joseph Downing, Wasim Ahmed. 2019. #MacronLeaks as a “warning shot” for European democracies:
challenges to election blackouts presented by social media and election meddling during the 2017
French presidential election. French Politics 17:3, 257-278. [Crossref]
590. Jan Philipp Rau, Sebastian Stier. 2019. Die Echokammer-Hypothese: Fragmentierung der
Öffentlichkeit und politische Polarisierung durch digitale Medien?. Zeitschrift für Vergleichende
Politikwissenschaft 13:3, 399-417. [Crossref]
591. R Kelly Garrett, Shannon Poulsen. 2019. Flagging Facebook Falsehoods: Self-Identified
Humor Warnings Outperform Fact Checker and Peer Warnings. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 24:5, 240-258. [Crossref]
592. Lauren Lutzke, Caitlin Drummond, Paul Slovic, Joseph Árvai. 2019. Priming critical thinking: Simple
interventions limit the influence of fake news about climate change on Facebook. Global Environmental
Change 58, 101964. [Crossref]
593. Louisa Ha, Loarre Andreu Perez, Rik Ray. 2019. Mapping Recent Development in Scholarship
on Fake News and Misinformation, 2008 to 2017: Disciplinary Contribution, Topics, and Impact.
American Behavioral Scientist 16, 000276421986940. [Crossref]
594. Sinan Aral, Dean Eckles. 2019. Protecting elections from social media manipulation. Science 365:6456,
858-861. [Crossref]
595. S. Mo Jones-Jang, Tara Mortensen, Jingjing Liu. 2019. Does Media Literacy Help Identification of
Fake News? Information Literacy Helps, but Other Literacies Don’t. American Behavioral Scientist
10, 000276421986940. [Crossref]
596. Johan Farkas, Jannick Schou. Political Theory in Post-factual Times 14-41. [Crossref]
597. Johan Farkas, Jannick Schou. Prophecies of Post-truth 45-67. [Crossref]
598. María Celeste Wagner, Pablo J. Boczkowski. 2019. The Reception of Fake News: The Interpretations
and Practices That Shape the Consumption of Perceived Misinformation. Digital Journalism 7:7,
870-885. [Crossref]
599. Timothy Macafee. 2019. Biased into posting: interactions with social media network political posts
during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Communication Research Reports 36:4, 326-337. [Crossref]
600. Anouk de Regt, Matteo Montecchi, Sarah Lord Ferguson. 2019. A false image of health: how
fake news and pseudo-facts spread in the health and beauty industry. Journal of Product & Brand
Management 29:2, 168-179. [Crossref]
601. Marco Battaglini, Eleonora Patacchini. 2019. Social Networks in Policy Making. Annual Review of
Economics 11:1, 473-494. [Crossref]
602. Jonas Colliander. 2019. “This is fake news”: Investigating the role of conformity to other users’ views
when commenting on and spreading disinformation in social media. Computers in Human Behavior
97, 202-215. [Crossref]

603. Maria Teresa Borges-Tiago, Flavio Tiago, Carla Cosme. 2019. Exploring users' motivations to
participate in viral communication on social media. Journal of Business Research 101, 574-582.
[Crossref]
604. Songqian Li, Kun Ma, Xuewei Niu, Yufeng Wang, Ke Ji, Ziqiang Yu, Zhenxiang Chen. Stacking-Based
Ensemble Learning on Low Dimensional Features for Fake News Detection 2730-2735. [Crossref]
605. Mattia Zago, Pantaleone Nespoli, Dimitrios Papamartzivanos, Manuel Gil Perez, Felix Gomez Marmol,
Georgios Kambourakis, Gregorio Martinez Perez. 2019. Screening Out Social Bots Interference: Are
There Any Silver Bullets?. IEEE Communications Magazine 57:8, 98-104. [Crossref]
606. Ana S Cardenal, Carlos Aguilar-Paredes, Camilo Cristancho, Sílvia Majó-Vázquez. 2019. Echochambers in online news consumption: Evidence from survey and navigation data in Spain. European
Journal of Communication 34:4, 360-376. [Crossref]
607. Arian Balouchestani, Mojtaba Mahdavi, Yeganeh Hallaj, Delaram Javdani. SANUB: A new method
for Sharing and Analyzing News Using Blockchain 139-143. [Crossref]
608. Mohamed K. Elhadad, Kin Fun Li, Fayez Gebali. Fake News Detection on Social Media: A Systematic
Survey 1-8. [Crossref]
609. Laks V. S. Lakshmanan, Michael Simpson, Saravanan Thirumuruganathan. 2019. Combating fake
news. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 12:12, 1990-1993. [Crossref]
610. Thiago Dias Silva, Luciana Duarte Oliveira. 2019. El monopolio de la verdad en la era de las Fake
News. Ratio Juris 14:28, 109-126. [Crossref]
611. Emily K. Vraga, Melissa Tully. 2019. News literacy, social media behaviors, and skepticism toward
information on social media. Information, Communication & Society 1, 1-17. [Crossref]
612. Marloes de Valk. 2019. What remains, un proyecto artístico que trata sobre las campañas de
desinformación (re)utilizando estrategias para retrasar la regulación industrial. Artnodes :24, 34.
[Crossref]
613. Antino Kim, Patricia L. Moravec, Alan R. Dennis. 2019. Combating Fake News on Social Media
with Source Ratings: The Effects of User and Expert Reputation Ratings. Journal of Management
Information Systems 36:3, 931-968. [Crossref]
614. Jengchung Victor Chen, Mahmoud Abdullah Elakhdary, Quang-An Ha. 2019. The Continuance Use
of Social Network Sites for Political Participation: Evidences from Arab Countries. Journal of Global
Information Technology Management 22:3, 156-178. [Crossref]
615. Edson C. Tandoc, Joy Jenkins, Stephanie Craft. 2019. Fake News as a Critical Incident in Journalism.
Journalism Practice 13:6, 673-689. [Crossref]
616. Sebastián Valenzuela, Daniel Halpern, James E. Katz, Juan Pablo Miranda. 2019. The Paradox
of Participation Versus Misinformation: Social Media, Political Engagement, and the Spread of
Misinformation. Digital Journalism 7:6, 802-823. [Crossref]
617. Patricia G. Elmore, Julianne M. Coleman. 2019. Middle School Students’ Analysis of Political Memes
to Support Critical Media Literacy. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy 63:1, 29-40. [Crossref]
618. Angela M. Kohnen, Gillian E. Mertens. 2019. “I'm Always Kind of Double‐Checking”: Exploring
the Information‐Seeking Identities of Expert Generalists. Reading Research Quarterly 54:3, 279-297.
[Crossref]
619. Ping Zhang, Zhifeng Bao, Yudong Niu, Yipeng Zhang, Songsong Mo, Fei Geng, Zhiyong Peng. 2019.
Proactive rumor control in online networks. World Wide Web 22:4, 1799-1818. [Crossref]
620. Lorenzo Bizzi, Alice Labban. 2019. The double-edged impact of social media on online trading:
Opportunities, threats, and recommendations for organizations. Business Horizons 62:4, 509-519.
[Crossref]

621. Luis Terán, José Mancera. 2019. Dynamic profiles using sentiment analysis and twitter data for voting
advice applications. Government Information Quarterly 36:3, 520-535. [Crossref]
622. Michail Batikas, Jörg Claussen, Christian Peukert. 2019. Follow the money: Online piracy and selfregulation in the advertising industry. International Journal of Industrial Organization 65, 121-151.
[Crossref]
623. Chris Leeder. 2019. How college students evaluate and share “fake news” stories. Library &
Information Science Research 41:3, 100967. [Crossref]
624. Zhan Liu, Shaban Shabani, Nicole Glassey Balet, Maria Sokhn. Detection of Satiric News on Social
Media: Analysis of the Phenomenon with a French Dataset 1-6. [Crossref]
625. Chi-Ying Chen, Zon-Ying Shae, Chien-Jen Chang, Kuan-Yuh Lin, Shu-Mei Tan, Shao-Liang
Chang. A Trusting News Ecosystem Against Fake News from Humanity and Technology Perspectives
132-137. [Crossref]
626. Zonyin Shae, Jeffrey Tsai. AI Blockchain Platform for Trusting News 1610-1619. [Crossref]
627. Rafael Angarita, Nikolaos Georgantas, Valerie Issarny. Social Middleware for Civic Engagement
1777-1786. [Crossref]
628. Fabio Martinelli, Francesco Mercaldo, Antonella Santone. Social Network Polluting Contents
Detection through Deep Learning Techniques 1-10. [Crossref]
629. Kyeong-Hwan Kim, Chang-Sung Jeong. Fake News Detection System using Article Abstraction
209-212. [Crossref]
630. Patrick Halbach, Laura Burbach, Johannes Nakayama, Nils Plettenberg, Martina Ziefle, Andre Calero
Valdez. Would I Lie to You? How Users Evaluate Faked Online Content Depending on Its Publication
Type 56-64. [Crossref]
631. Fabio Giglietto, Laura Iannelli, Augusto Valeriani, Luca Rossi. 2019. ‘Fake news’ is the invention of a
liar: How false information circulates within the hybrid news system. Current Sociology 67:4, 625-642.
[Crossref]
632. Jesper Tække. 2019. Acquisition of new communication media and social (dis)connectivity. Current
Sociology 67:4, 579-593. [Crossref]
633. Tanya Notley, Michael Dezuanni. 2019. Advancing children’s news media literacy: learning from the
practices and experiences of young Australians. Media, Culture & Society 41:5, 689-707. [Crossref]
634. Logan Molyneux. 2019. A Personalized Self-image: Gender and Branding Practices Among
Journalists. Social Media + Society 5:3, 205630511987295. [Crossref]
635. Bryson R. Payne, Edward L. Mienie. 2019. The Impact of Cyber-Physical Warfare on Global Human
Security. International Journal of Cyber Warfare and Terrorism 9:3, 36-50. [Crossref]
636. Timothy G. Pollock, Kisha Lashley, Violina P. Rindova, Jung-Hoon Han. 2019. Which of These
Things Are Not Like the Others? Comparing the Rational, Emotional, and Moral Aspects of
Reputation, Status, Celebrity, and Stigma. Academy of Management Annals 13:2, 444-478. [Crossref]
637. Cristian Pop, Alexandru Popa. 2019. NewsCompare - A novel application for detecting news influence
in a country. SoftwareX 10, 100305. [Crossref]
638. Norbert Merkovity. 2019. A Possible Framework for Attention-Based Politics. International Journal
of E-Politics 10:2, 13-23. [Crossref]
639. Adamkolo Mohammed Ibrahim. 2019. Theorizing the Journalism Model of Disinformation and Hate
Speech Propagation in a Nigerian Democratic Context. International Journal of E-Politics 10:2, 60-73.
[Crossref]
640. Tal Samuel-Azran, Tsahi Hayat. 2019. Online news recommendations credibility: The tie is mightier
than the source. Comunicar 27:60, 71-80. [Crossref]

641. Xiaoyan Lu, Jianxi Gao, Boleslaw K. Szymanski. 2019. The evolution of polarization in the legislative
branch of government. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 16:156, 20190010. [Crossref]
642. Adnan Qayyum, Junaid Qadir, Muhammad Umar Janjua, Falak Sher. 2019. Using Blockchain to
Rein in the New Post-Truth World and Check the Spread of Fake News. IT Professional 21:4, 16-24.
[Crossref]
643. Stella Ladi, Vasiliki Tsagkroni. 2019. Analysing Crisis Parliamentary Discourse in Greece: Whom
Should We Blame?. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 57:4, 729-748. [Crossref]
644. Andrea Carson. The Rise of Collaborative Investigative Journalism 1 144-170. [Crossref]
645. Kai Kaspar, Moritz Müller-Jensen. 2019. Information seeking behavior on Facebook: The role of
censorship endorsement and personality. Current Psychology 31. . [Crossref]
646. Andreia Fernandes Silva. 2019. Porque é que as fake news se transformaram em protagonistas do
jornalismo contemporâneo?. Comunicação pública :Vol.14 nº 26. . [Crossref]
647. Linda W. Lee, David Hannah, Ian P. McCarthy. 2019. Do your employees think your slogan is “fake
news?” A framework for understanding the impact of fake company slogans on employees. Journal of
Product & Brand Management 29:2, 199-208. [Crossref]
648. Nicholas Snell, Jeremy Straub, Brandon Stoick, Terry Traylor, William Fleck. Assessing online media
reliability: trust, metrics and assessment 8. [Crossref]
649. Herman Wasserman. Tabloidization of the News 277-289. [Crossref]
650. Alex Alexandrou. Cybercrime 61-66. [Crossref]
651. Joseph Firth, John Torous, Brendon Stubbs, Josh A. Firth, Genevieve Z. Steiner, Lee Smith, Mario
Alvarez‐Jimenez, John Gleeson, Davy Vancampfort, Christopher J. Armitage, Jerome Sarris. 2019.
The “online brain”: how the Internet may be changing our cognition. World Psychiatry 18:2, 119-129.
[Crossref]
652. Zia Mehrabi, Simon Donner, Patricia Rios, Debarati Guha-Sapir, Pedram Rowhani, Milind Kandlikar,
Navin Ramankutty. 2019. Can we sustain success in reducing deaths to extreme weather in a hotter
world?. World Development Perspectives 14, 100107. [Crossref]
653. Alexander Lanoszka. 2019. Disinformation in international politics. European Journal of International
Security 4:2, 227-248. [Crossref]
654. Angela Anthony, Richard Moulding. 2019. Breaking the news: Belief in fake news and conspiracist
beliefs. Australian Journal of Psychology 71:2, 154-162. [Crossref]
655. Xinzhe Wang, Xu Wu, Xiaqing Xie, Jin Xu. Hybrid Text Topic Discovery Method for Multi-source
Information 445-452. [Crossref]
656. Camilo Onoda Luiz Caldas, Pedro Neris Luiz Caldas. 2019. Estado, democracia e tecnologia: conflitos
políticos e vulnerabilidade no contexto do big-data, das fake news e das shitstorms. Perspectivas em
Ciência da Informação 24:2, 196-220. [Crossref]
657. Pavel Korshunov, Sebastien Marcel. Vulnerability assessment and detection of Deepfake videos 1-6.
[Crossref]
658. Ascensión Andina-Díaz, José A. García-Martínez, Antonio Parravano. 2019. The market for scoops:
a dynamic approach. SERIEs 10:2, 175-206. [Crossref]
659. Bruce Mutsvairo, Saba Bebawi. 2019. Journalism Educators, Regulatory Realities, and Pedagogical
Predicaments of the “Fake News” Era: A Comparative Perspective on the Middle East and Africa.
Journalism & Mass Communication Educator 74:2, 143-157. [Crossref]
660. Harikrishnan Bhaskaran, Harsh Mishra, Pradeep Nair. 2019. Journalism Education in Post-Truth
Era: Pedagogical Approaches Based on Indian Journalism Students’ Perception of Fake News.
Journalism & Mass Communication Educator 74:2, 158-170. [Crossref]

661. Kevin Hjortshøj O’Rourke. 2019. Economic History and Contemporary Challenges to Globalization.
The Journal of Economic History 79:2, 356-382. [Crossref]
662. Moncef Belhadjali, Gary Whaley, Sami Abbasi. 2019. Assigning Responsibility for Preventing the
Spread of Misinformation Online: Some Findings on Gender Differences. International Journal of
Innovation Education and Research 7:5, 195-201. [Crossref]
663. Karishma Sharma, Feng Qian, He Jiang, Natali Ruchansky, Ming Zhang, Yan Liu. 2019. Combating
Fake News. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 10:3, 1-42. [Crossref]
664. Adam J. Mills, Karen Robson. 2019. Brand management in the era of fake news: narrative response as
a strategy to insulate brand value. Journal of Product & Brand Management 29:2, 159-167. [Crossref]
665. Vinaya Manchaiah, Berth Danermark, Per Germundsson, Pierre Ratinaud. Advantages of the Social
Representations Theory and further directions 159-171. [Crossref]
666. Michail Vafeiadis, Denise S. Bortree, Christen Buckley, Pratiti Diddi, Anli Xiao. 2019. Refuting fake
news on social media: nonprofits, crisis response strategies and issue involvement. Journal of Product
& Brand Management 29:2, 209-222. [Crossref]
667. Cleber Pinelli Teixeira, Jônatas Castro dos Santos, Reisla D’Almeida Rodrigues, Sean Wolfgand
Matsui Siqueira, Renata Araujo. Chapter 14 Social Media and the Brazilian Politics: A Close Look at
the Different Perspectives and “The Brazil I Want” Initiative 203-219. [Crossref]
668. Daniel Belanche, Isabel Cenjor, Alfredo Pérez-Rueda. 2019. Instagram Stories versus Facebook Wall:
an advertising effectiveness analysis. Spanish Journal of Marketing - ESIC 23:1, 69-94. [Crossref]
669. Caitlin Candice Ferreira, Jeandri Robertson, Marnell Kirsten. 2019. The truth (as I see it):
philosophical considerations influencing a typology of fake news. Journal of Product & Brand
Management 29:2, 150-158. [Crossref]
670. Jeannette Paschen. 2019. Investigating the emotional appeal of fake news using artificial intelligence
and human contributions. Journal of Product & Brand Management 29:2, 223-233. [Crossref]
671. Jon Roozenbeek, Sander van der Linden. 2019. The fake news game: actively inoculating against the
risk of misinformation. Journal of Risk Research 22:5, 570-580. [Crossref]
672. GREGORY J. MARTIN, JOSHUA McCRAIN. 2019. Local News and National Politics. American
Political Science Review 113:2, 372-384. [Crossref]
673. Itzhak Yanovitzky, Matthew S Weber. 2019. News Media as Knowledge Brokers in Public
Policymaking Processes. Communication Theory 29:2, 191-212. [Crossref]
674. Florian Arendt, Mario Haim, Julia Beck. 2019. Fake News, Warnhinweise und perzipierter
Wahrheitsgehalt: Zur unterschiedlichen Anfälligkeit für Falschmeldungen in Abhängigkeit von der
politischen Orientierung. Publizistik 64:2, 181-204. [Crossref]
675. Yariv Tsfati, Nathan Walter. Credibility 1-5. [Crossref]
676. Dumisani Moyo, Admire Mare, Trust Matsilele. 2019. Analytics-Driven Journalism? Editorial
Metrics and the Reconfiguration of Online News Production Practices in African Newsrooms". Digital
Journalism 7:4, 490-506. [Crossref]
677. Edward Rock Davis, Rachel Wilson, John Robert Evans. 2019. Media neglect of Indigenous student
performance in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2001–2015. The
Australian Journal of Indigenous Education 8, 1-11. [Crossref]
678. Shanto Iyengar, Douglas S. Massey. 2019. Scientific communication in a post-truth society.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116:16, 7656-7661. [Crossref]
679. Subin Sudhir, Anandakuttan B. Unnithan. 2019. Marketplace rumor sharing among young
consumers: the role of anxiety and arousal. Young Consumers 20:1, 1-13. [Crossref]

680. Erik Brynjolfsson, Avinash Collis, Felix Eggers. 2019. Using massive online choice experiments to
measure changes in well-being. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116:15, 7250-7255.
[Crossref]
681. Jana Laura Egelhofer, Sophie Lecheler. 2019. Fake news as a two-dimensional phenomenon: a
framework and research agenda. Annals of the International Communication Association 43:2, 97-116.
[Crossref]
682. Amy I. Nathanson, William P. Eveland. 2019. Parental mediation during the U.S. 2016 presidential
election campaign: How parents criticized, restricted, and co-viewed news coverage. Communication
Monographs 86:2, 184-204. [Crossref]
683. Kieran Tranter. 2019. Die Buribunken as science fiction: the self and informational existence. Griffith
Law Review 28:2, 118-136. [Crossref]
684. Frederik Hjorth, Rebecca Adler-Nissen. 2019. Ideological Asymmetry in the Reach of Pro-Russian
Digital Disinformation to United States Audiences. Journal of Communication 69:2, 168-192.
[Crossref]
685. Veronika Villnow, Meike Rombach, Vera Bitsch. 2019. Examining German Media Coverage of the
Re-Evaluation of Glyphosate. Sustainability 11:7, 1910. [Crossref]
686. Muhammad Tafriet, Putu W. Handayani, Ave Adriana Pinem. User Motivation Analysis in Sharing
Hoaxes In Indonesia 1-6. [Crossref]
687. A. V. Aleinikov, V. P. Miletskiy, N. P. Pimenov, A. I. Strebkov. 2019. The “Fake-News” Phenomenon
and Transformation of Information Strategies in the Digital Society. Scientific and Technical
Information Processing 46:2, 117-122. [Crossref]
688. Alireza Mansouri, Fattaneh Taghiyareh, Javad Hatami. Improving Opinion Formation Models on
Social Media Through Emotions 6-11. [Crossref]
689. Masahiro Yamamoto, Alyssa C. Morey. 2019. Incidental News Exposure on Social Media: A Campaign
Communication Mediation Approach. Social Media + Society 5:2, 205630511984361. [Crossref]
690. Raquel Recuero, Gabriela Zago, Felipe Soares. 2019. Using Social Network Analysis and Social Capital
to Identify User Roles on Polarized Political Conversations on Twitter. Social Media + Society 5:2,
205630511984874. [Crossref]
691. Hunt Allcott, Matthew Gentzkow, Chuan Yu. 2019. Trends in the diffusion of misinformation on
social media. Research & Politics 6:2, 205316801984855. [Crossref]
692. R. Kelly Garrett. 2019. Social media’s contribution to political misperceptions in U.S. Presidential
elections. PLOS ONE 14:3, e0213500. [Crossref]
693. Lloyd S. Etheredge. Wisdom in History and Politics 721-753. [Crossref]
694. Isabella Hansen, Darren J. Lim. 2019. Doxing democracy: influencing elections via cyber voter
interference. Contemporary Politics 25:2, 150-171. [Crossref]
695. Avi Goldfarb, Catherine Tucker. 2019. Digital Economics. Journal of Economic Literature 57:1, 3-43.
[Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
696. George Cairns, George Wright. 2019. Making scenario interventions matter: Exploring issues of power
and rationality. Futures & Foresight Science 1:1, e10. [Crossref]
697. Martina Temmerman, Renée Moernaut, Roel Coesemans, Jelle Mast. 2019. Post-truth and the
political: Constructions and distortions in representing political facts. Discourse, Context & Media 27,
1-6. [Crossref]
698. G. Harianto, E. B. Setiawan, Y. R. Murti. 2019. Automated social media account identification using
Simplified Brute Force. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1192, 012054. [Crossref]

699. Anjan Pal, Alton Y. K. Chua. Propagation Pattern as a Telltale Sign of Fake News on Social Media
269-273. [Crossref]
700. Alfred T.‐K. Ho. 2019. Donald F. Kettl , Can Government Earn Our Trust? (Malden, MA:
Polity Press, 2017). 144 pp. $10.99 (e‐Book), ISBN: 9781509522491. Roberts, Alasdair , Can
Government Do Anything Right? (Malden, MA: Polity Press, 2018). 144 pp. $8.99 (e‐Book), ISBN:
9781509521517. Public Administration Review 79:2, 291-294. [Crossref]
701. Adam J. Mills, Christine Pitt, Sarah Lord Ferguson. 2019. The Relationship between Fake News
And Advertising. Journal of Advertising Research 59:1, 3-8. [Crossref]
702. Timothy Sellnow, Adam Parrish, Lauren Semenas. 2019. From Hoax as Crisis to Crisis as Hoax: Fake
News and Information Disorder as Disruptions to the Discourse of Renewal. Journal of International
Crisis and Risk Communication Research 2:1, 121-142. [Crossref]
703. Eduard Fourie, Martin Terre Blanche. 2019. About accountants and translators: reshaping community
engagement in South African psychology. South African Journal of Psychology 49:1, 39-51. [Crossref]
704. Vishal Bhavsar, Shuo Zhang, Dinesh Bhugra. 2019. Conceptualizing globalization for mental health
research. International Journal of Social Psychiatry 65:2, 87-91. [Crossref]
705. Rebecca S. Natow. 2019. Online Qualitative Data Sources for Federal Regulatory Policy Studies.
American Behavioral Scientist 63:3, 315-332. [Crossref]
706. Cecile H. Sam. 2019. Shaping Discourse Through Social Media: Using Foucauldian Discourse
Analysis to Explore the Narratives That Influence Educational Policy. American Behavioral Scientist
63:3, 333-350. [Crossref]
707. Jung-Yoon Yum, Se-Hoon Jeong. 2019. Predictors of fake news exposure and sharing : personality,
new media literacy, and motives. Korean Journal of Journalism & Communication Studies 63:1, 7-45.
[Crossref]
708. Peter Buneman, Wang-Chiew Tan. 2019. Data Provenance. ACM SIGMOD Record 47:3, 5-16.
[Crossref]
709. Pippa Norris, Ronald Inglehart. Cultural Backlash 17, . [Crossref]
710. Craig J. Thompson. 2019. The ‘big data’ myth and the pitfalls of ‘thick data’ opportunism: on the
need for a different ontology of markets and consumption. Journal of Marketing Management 35:3-4,
207-230. [Crossref]
711. Fabio Sabatini, Francesco Sarracino. 2019. Online Social Networks and Trust. Social Indicators Research
142:1, 229-260. [Crossref]
712. Megan A. Vendemia, Robert M. Bond, David C. DeAndrea. 2019. The strategic presentation of user
comments affects how political messages are evaluated on social media sites: Evidence for robust effects
across party lines. Computers in Human Behavior 91, 279-289. [Crossref]
713. Oliver Kovacs. 2019. Big IFs in Productivity-Enhancing Industry 4.0. Social Sciences 8:2, 37. [Crossref]
714. Philip Mirowski. 2019. Hell Is Truth Seen Too Late. boundary 2 46:1, 1-53. [Crossref]
715. Eric Knight, Haridimos Tsoukas. 2019. When Fiction Trumps Truth: What ‘post-truth’ and
‘alternative facts’ mean for management studies. Organization Studies 40:2, 183-197. [Crossref]
716. Cuihua Shen, Mona Kasra, Wenjing Pan, Grace A Bassett, Yining Malloch, James F O’Brien. 2019.
Fake images: The effects of source, intermediary, and digital media literacy on contextual assessment
of image credibility online. New Media & Society 21:2, 438-463. [Crossref]
717. Martin Innes, Diyana Dobreva, Helen Innes. 2019. Disinformation and digital influencing after
terrorism: spoofing, truthing and social proofing. Contemporary Social Science 1-15. [Crossref]
718. Nir Grinberg, Kenneth Joseph, Lisa Friedland, Briony Swire-Thompson, David Lazer. 2019. Fake
news on Twitter during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Science 363:6425, 374-378. [Crossref]

719. Edward Hurcombe, Jean Burgess, Stephen Harrington. 2019. What’s newsworthy about ‘social news’?
Characteristics and potential of an emerging genre. Journalism 31, 146488491879393. [Crossref]
720. . References 179-204. [Crossref]
721. Nurhan KAVAKLI. 2019. Yalan Haberle Mücadele ve İnternet Teyit/Doğrulama Platformları. Erciyes
İletişim Dergisi 6:1, 663-682. [Crossref]
722. Nurhan KAVAKLI. 2019. ÜNİVERSİTE ÖĞRENCİLERİ ARASINDA İNTERNET TEYİT/
DOĞRULAMA PLATFORMLARININ KULLANIMI. Elektronik Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 18:69,
398-411. [Crossref]
723. John Buschman. 2019. Good news, bad news, and fake news. Journal of Documentation 75:1, 213-228.
[Crossref]
724. LEE Jerome, Alex Elwick. 2019. Identifying an Educational Response to the Prevent Policy:
Student Perspectives on Learning about Terrorism, Extremism and Radicalisation. British Journal of
Educational Studies 67:1, 97-114. [Crossref]
725. Emily Van Duyn, Jessica Collier. 2019. Priming and Fake News: The Effects of Elite Discourse on
Evaluations of News Media. Mass Communication and Society 22:1, 29-48. [Crossref]
726. Óscar G. Luengo, Jaime Peláez-Berbell. 2019. Exploring the accuracy of electoral polls during
campaigns in 2016: only bad press?. Contemporary Social Science 14:1, 43-53. [Crossref]
727. Joshua A. Braun, Jessica L. Eklund. 2019. Fake News, Real Money: Ad Tech Platforms, Profit-Driven
Hoaxes, and the Business of Journalism. Digital Journalism 7:1, 1-21. [Crossref]
728. Terry Flew. 2019. Digital communication, the crisis of trust, and the post-global. Communication
Research and Practice 5:1, 4-22. [Crossref]
729. Stanley Tsarwe, Admire Mare. 2019. Journalistic Framing of Electoral Conflict in a Politically Fragile
Society: A Comparative Study of the Zimbabwean Weekly Press. African Journalism Studies 40:1,
18-35. [Crossref]
730. Wonchan Choi, Maria Haigh. 2019. Analyzing divergent methodologies for political fact checking:
United States and South Korea. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology
56:1, 627-628. [Crossref]
731. Melissa M. Cyrill, Aftab Kamal Pasha. Diplomacy in the Internet Age—Challenges and Opportunities
for the UAE 85-93. [Crossref]
732. K. Anoop, Manjary P. Gangan, Deepak P, V. L. Lajish. Leveraging Heterogeneous Data for Fake
News Detection 229-264. [Crossref]
733. Tereza Kuldova. Popular Culture, Populism and the Figure of the ‘Criminal’ On the Rising Popular
Support of Outlaw Bikers and Anti-Establishment Resentment 233-258. [Crossref]
734. Michael Orlov, Marina Litvak. Using Behavior and Text Analysis to Detect Propagandists and
Misinformers on Twitter 67-74. [Crossref]
735. Ania Korsunska. The Spread and Mutation of Science Misinformation 162-169. [Crossref]
736. Nitin Verma, Kenneth R. Fleischmann, Kolina S. Koltai. Understanding Online Trust and
Information Behavior Using Demographics and Human Values 654-665. [Crossref]
737. Manuel Au-Yong-Oliveira, Carlota P. A. Carlos, Hugo Pintor, João Caires, Julia Zanoni. Fake News
and Social Networks: How Users Interact with Fake Content 195-205. [Crossref]
738. Monika Bednarek. The Language and News Values of ‘Most Highly Shared’ News 157-188. [Crossref]
739. Darren G. Lilleker. The Power of Visual Political Communication: Pictorial Politics Through the
Lens of Communication Psychology 37-51. [Crossref]
740. Kirsten Liere-Netheler, León Gilhaus, Kristin Vogelsang, Uwe Hoppe. A Literature Review on
Application Areas of Social Media Analytics 38-49. [Crossref]

741. Adrian M. P. Braşoveanu, Răzvan Andonie. Semantic Fake News Detection: A Machine Learning
Perspective 656-667. [Crossref]
742. Gautam Prakash, Ravinder Kumar Verma, P. Vigneswara Ilavarasan, Arpan K. Kar. Authenticating
Fake News: An Empirical Study in India 339-350. [Crossref]
743. Joshua Uyheng, Kathleen M. Carley. Characterizing Bot Networks on Twitter: An Empirical Analysis
of Contentious Issues in the Asia-Pacific 153-162. [Crossref]
744. Zahra Rajabi, Amarda Shehu, Hemant Purohit. User Behavior Modelling for Fake Information
Mitigation on Social Web 234-244. [Crossref]
745. Tahora H. Nazer, Matthew Davis, Mansooreh Karami, Leman Akoglu, David Koelle, Huan Liu. Bot
Detection: Will Focusing on Recall Cause Overall Performance Deterioration? 39-49. [Crossref]
746. Daniel Halpern, Sebastián Valenzuela, James Katz, Juan Pablo Miranda. From Belief in Conspiracy
Theories to Trust in Others: Which Factors Influence Exposure, Believing and Sharing Fake News
217-232. [Crossref]
747. Margarita Bugueño, Gabriel Sepulveda, Marcelo Mendoza. An Empirical Analysis of Rumor Detection
on Microblogs with Recurrent Neural Networks 293-310. [Crossref]
748. Hailu Xu, Liting Hu, Pinchao Liu, Boyuan Guan. Exploiting the Spam Correlations in Scalable
Online Social Spam Detection 146-160. [Crossref]
749. Christian Scheibenzuber, Nicolae Nistor. Media Literacy Training Against Fake News in Online
Media 688-691. [Crossref]
750. Douglas Vitório, Ellen Souza, Adriano L. I. Oliveira. Evaluating Active Learning Sampling Strategies
for Opinion Mining in Brazilian Politics Corpora 695-707. [Crossref]
751. Andon Tchechmedjiev, Pavlos Fafalios, Katarina Boland, Malo Gasquet, Matthäus Zloch, Benjamin
Zapilko, Stefan Dietze, Konstantin Todorov. ClaimsKG: A Knowledge Graph of Fact-Checked Claims
309-324. [Crossref]
752. Guoyong Hu, Ye Ding, Shuhan Qi, Xuan Wang, Qing Liao. Multi-depth Graph Convolutional
Networks for Fake News Detection 698-710. [Crossref]
753. Jairo L. Alves, Leila Weitzel, Paulo Quaresma, Carlos E. Cardoso, Luan Cunha. Brazilian Presidential
Elections in the Era of Misinformation: A Machine Learning Approach to Analyse Fake News 72-84.
[Crossref]
754. Hemant Purohit, Rahul Pandey. Intent Mining for the Good, Bad, and Ugly Use of Social Web:
Concepts, Methods, and Challenges 3-18. [Crossref]
755. Ugur Kursuncu, Manas Gaur, Usha Lokala, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan, Amit Sheth, I. Budak
Arpinar. Predictive Analysis on Twitter: Techniques and Applications 67-104. [Crossref]
756. André Calero Valdez, Martina Ziefle. Believability of News 469-477. [Crossref]
757. Matthew S. McGlone, Mark L. Knapp. Historical Perspectives on the Study of Lying and Deception
3-28. [Crossref]
758. Marc-André Kaufhold, Christian Reuter. Cultural Violence and Peace in Social Media 361-381.
[Crossref]
759. Ramian Fathi, Anne-Marie Brixy, Frank Fiedrich. Desinformationen und Fake-News in der Lage:
Virtual Operations Support Team (VOST) und Digital Volunteers im Einsatz 211-235. [Crossref]
760. Ritam Dutt, Ashok Deb, Emilio Ferrara. “Senator, We Sell Ads”: Analysis of the 2016 Russian
Facebook Ads Campaign 151-168. [Crossref]
761. Pavica Sheldon, Philipp A. Rauschnabel, James M. Honeycutt. Social Media Lies and Rumors
151-167. [Crossref]

762. Jason C. Coronel, Daniel Colón Amill, Erin Drouin. Two-way translation: Advancing knowledge of
politics and psychology via the study of bilingual voters 39-65. [Crossref]
763. Sangwon Lee, Michael Xenos. 2019. Social distraction? Social media use and political knowledge in
two U.S. Presidential elections. Computers in Human Behavior 90, 18-25. [Crossref]
764. Shintaro Miura. 2019. Manipulated news model: Electoral competition and mass media. Games and
Economic Behavior 113, 306-338. [Crossref]
765. Ellen Middaugh. 2019. More Than Just Facts: Promoting Civic Media Literacy in the Era of Outrage.
Peabody Journal of Education 94:1, 17-31. [Crossref]
766. Patrick J Kennedy, Andrea Prat. 2019. Where do people get their news?*. Economic Policy 34:97,
5-47. [Crossref]
767. Wenli Yang, Erfan Aghasian, Saurabh Garg, David Herbert, Leandro Disiuta, Byeong Kang. 2019. A
Survey on Blockchain-Based Internet Service Architecture: Requirements, Challenges, Trends, and
Future. IEEE Access 7, 75845-75872. [Crossref]
768. Muhammad Shahroz Nadeem, Virginia N. L. Franqueira, Xiaojun Zhai, Fatih Kurugollu. 2019.
A Survey of Deep Learning Solutions for Multimedia Visual Content Analysis. IEEE Access 7,
84003-84019. [Crossref]
769. Axel Oehmichen, Kevin Hua, Julio Amador Diaz Lopez, Miguel Molina-Solana, Juan GomezRomero, Yi-ke Guo. 2019. Not All Lies Are Equal. A Study Into the Engineering of Political
Misinformation in the 2016 US Presidential Election. IEEE Access 7, 126305-126314. [Crossref]
770. Tanzeela Jameel, Rukhsana Ali, Kamran Ahmed Malik. Social Media as an Opinion Formulator: A
Study on Implications and Recent Developments 1-6. [Crossref]
771. Andrew Guess, Jonathan Nagler, Joshua Tucker. 2019. Less than you think: Prevalence and predictors
of fake news dissemination on Facebook. Science Advances 5:1, eaau4586. [Crossref]
772. Vivian Lai, Chenhao Tan. On Human Predictions with Explanations and Predictions of Machine
Learning Models 29-38. [Crossref]
773. Xinyi Zhou, Reza Zafarani, Kai Shu, Huan Liu. Fake News 836-837. [Crossref]
774. Minsuk Choi, Cheonbok Park, Soyoung Yang, Yonggyu Kim, Jaegul Choo, Sungsoo Ray Hong.
AILA 1-12. [Crossref]
775. Abu Saleh Md Noman, Sanchari Das, Sameer Patil. Techies Against Facebook 1-15. [Crossref]
776. Armin Mertens, Franziska Pradel, Ayjeren Rozyjumayeva, Jens Wäckerle. As the Tweet, so the Reply?
193-201. [Crossref]
777. Alireza Karduni, Isaac Cho, Ryan Wesslen, Sashank Santhanam, Svitlana Volkova, Dustin L Arendt,
Samira Shaikh, Wenwen Dou. Vulnerable to misinformation? 312-323. [Crossref]
778. Lukasz Porwol, Adegboyega Ojo. Harnessing Virtual Reality for e-Participation 324-331. [Crossref]
779. Kurt Wirth, Ericka Menchen-Trevino, Ryan T. Moore. Bots By Topic 77-82. [Crossref]
780. Michael A. Stefanone, Matthew Vollmer, Jessica M. Covert. In News We Trust? 136-147. [Crossref]
781. Janaína Ignácio de Morais, Hugo Queiroz Abonizio, Gabriel Marques Tavares, André Azevedo
da Fonseca, Sylvio Barbon. Deciding among Fake, Satirical, Objective and Legitimate news 1-8.
[Crossref]
782. Christian Siregar, Murty Magda Pane, Rusliansyah Anwar. Pancasila, Ethos Respect, and Anti-hoaxes
on Internet-based Social Media 3-7. [Crossref]
783. David Blanco-Herrero, Carlos Arcila Calderón. Spread and reception of fake news promoting hate
speech against migrants and refugees in social media 949-955. [Crossref]
784. Iñaki Celaya, María Soledad Ramírez-Montoya, Concepción Naval, Elena Arbués. The educational
potential of the podcast 1040-1045. [Crossref]

785. Andres Algaba, David Ardia, Keven Bluteau, Samuel Borms, Kris Boudt. 2019. Econometrics Meets
Sentiment: An Overview of Methodology and Applications. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
786. Elisa Long, Keith Chen, Ryne Rohla. 2019. Political Storms: Tracking Hurricane Evacuation Behavior
Using Smartphone Data. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
787. Felix Chopra, Ingar Haaland, Christopher Roth. 2019. Do People Value More Informative News?.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
788. Matthias Georg Will, Ingo Pies. 2019. Developing Advocacy Strategies for Avoiding Discourse Failure
through Moralizing and Emotionalizing Campaigns. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
789. Pier Luigi Parcu. 2019. New Digital Threats to Media Pluralism in the Information Age. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
790. Elliott Ash, Sergio Galletta. 2019. Partisan Media and Fiscal Policy Choices: Evidence from U.S. Cable
News Channels. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
791. Haemin Jee, Hans Lueders, Rachel Myrick. 2019. Towards a Unified Concept of Democratic
Backsliding. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
792. Elliott Ash, Mikhail Poyker. 2019. Conservative News Media and Criminal Justice: Evidence from
Exposure to Fox News Channel. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
793. Michele Cantarella, Nicolò Fraccaroli, Roberto Geno Volpe. 2019. Does Fake News Affect Voting
Behaviour?. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
794. Niels Dalum Hansen, Kåre Mølbak, Ingemar Johansson Cox, Christina Lioma. 2019. Relationship
Between Media Coverage and Measles-Mumps-Rubella (MMR) Vaccination Uptake in Denmark:
Retrospective Study. JMIR Public Health and Surveillance 5:1, e9544. [Crossref]
795. Byeowool Kim, Yongik Yoon. 2019. Journalism Model Based on Blockchain with Sharing Space.
Symmetry 11:1, 19. [Crossref]
796. Michael Etter, Davide Ravasi, Elanor Colleoni. 2019. Social Media and the Formation of
Organizational Reputation. Academy of Management Review 44:1, 28-52. [Crossref]
797. Craig R. McClain. 2019. Likes, comments, and shares of marine organism imagery on Facebook.
PeerJ 7, e6795. [Crossref]
798. Paolo Gerbaudo, Federico Marogna, Chiara Alzetta. 2019. When “Positive Posting” Attracts Voters:
User Engagement and Emotions in the 2017 UK Election Campaign on Facebook. Social Media +
Society 5:4, 205630511988169. [Crossref]
799. David Godes, Dina Mayzlin, Odilon Camara, Doug Chung, Chris Hydock, Richard Kotchmar, Claire
Lim, Sarah Moshary, Neeru Paharia, Nils Wernerfelt, Pinar Yildirim, Ali Yurukoglu, Lingling Zhang.
2019. Politics, Persuasion and Choice. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
800. Sergei Guriev, Nikita Melnikov, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2019. 3G Internet and Confidence in
Government. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
801. Polly Wainwright, Houssain Kettani. An Analysis of Botnet Models 116-121. [Crossref]
802. Curd Knüpfer. Die Medien in den USA 1-16. [Crossref]
803. Ilan Manor. The Specter of Echo Chambers—Public Diplomacy in the Age of Disinformation
135-176. [Crossref]
804. Avishai Green. 2019. Speaking Bullshit to Power: Populism and the Rhetoric of Bullshit. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
805. Sopan Khosla, Niyati Chhaya, Shivam Jindal, Oindrila Saha, Milind Srivastava. Do Events Change
Opinions on Social Media? Studying the 2016 US Presidential Debates 287-297. [Crossref]

806. Delia Neuman, Mary Jean Tecce DeCarlo, Vera J. Lee, Stacey Greenwell, Allen Grant. Expanding
Information Literacy: The Roles of Digital and Critical Literacies in Learning with Information
93-117. [Crossref]
807. Laura Burbach, Patrick Halbach, Martina Ziefle, André Calero Valdez. Bubble Trouble: Strategies
Against Filter Bubbles in Online Social Networks 441-456. [Crossref]
808. Iulian Vamanu. 2019. Fake News and Propaganda: A Critical Discourse Research Perspective. Open
Information Science 3:1, 197-208. [Crossref]
809. Bartosz W. Wojdynski, Matthew T. Binford, Brittany N. Jefferson. 2019. Looks Real, or Really
Fake? Warnings, Visual Attention and Detection of False News Articles. Open Information Science
3:1, 166-180. [Crossref]
810. Anna Cristina Brisola, Andréa Doyle. 2019. Critical Information Literacy as a Path to Resist “Fake
News”: Understanding Disinformation as the Root Problem. Open Information Science 3:1, 274-286.
[Crossref]
811. ALEXANDRE FERREIRA, TIAGO CARVALHO, FERNANDA ANDALÓ, ANDERSON
ROCHA. 2019. Counteracting the contemporaneous proliferation of digital forgeries and fake news.
Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências 91:suppl 1. . [Crossref]
812. Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, Maria Petrova, Ruben Enikolopov. 2019. Political Effects of the Internet and
Social Media. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
813. Pritika Bahad, Preeti Saxena, Raj Kamal. 2019. Fake News Detection using Bi-directional LSTMRecurrent Neural Network. Procedia Computer Science 165, 74-82. [Crossref]
814. Susannah B. F. Paletz, Brooke E. Auxier, Ewa M. Golonka. Introduction 1-7. [Crossref]
815. Susannah B. F. Paletz, Brooke E. Auxier, Ewa M. Golonka. Motivation to Share 37-45. [Crossref]
816. Susannah B. F. Paletz, Brooke E. Auxier, Ewa M. Golonka. Reactions to the Message and Messenger
15-36. [Crossref]
817. Gad Allon, Kimon Drakopoulos, Vahideh Manshadi. 2019. Information Inundation on Platforms and
Implications. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
818. Matthias Murawski, Julian Bühler, Martin Böckle, Jan Pawlowski, Markus Bick. Social Media
Information Literacy – What Does It Mean and How Can We Measure It? 367-379. [Crossref]
819. Dixie D. Massey. Texts and Tasks 78-99. [Crossref]
820. Anjan Pal, Snehasish Banerjee. Understanding Online Falsehood From the Perspective of Social
Problem 1-17. [Crossref]
821. Thomas Dale. The Fundamental Roles of Technology in the Spread of Fake News 122-137. [Crossref]
822. Rosanna E. Guadagno, Karen Guttieri. Fake News and Information Warfare 167-191. [Crossref]
823. Benson Rajan. New Mythologies of Fake News 192-208. [Crossref]
824. Stephanie Jean Tsang. News Credibility and Media Literacy in the Digital Age 135-155. [Crossref]
825. Stephanie M. Grant, Frank Douglas Hodge, Samantha C Seto. 2019. Can a Deliberative Mindset
Prompt Reduce Investors’ Reliance on Fake News?. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
826. Chin-Chia Hsu, Amir Ajorlou, Ali Jadbabaie. 2019. A Theory of Misinformation Spread on Social
Networks. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
827. Ashley Stewart, Joshua Schuschke, Brendesha Tynes. Online Racism: Adjustment and Protective
Factors Among Adolescents of Color 501-513. [Crossref]
828. Danilo Vassallo, Giacomo Bormetti, Fabrizio Lillo. 2019. A Tale of Two Sentiment Scales:
Disentangling Short-Run and Long-Run Components in Multivariate Sentiment Dynamics. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]

829. Jorge Mejia, Jui Ramaprasad. 2019. Black Lies vs. White Lies: Information Asymmetry and Bias in
Fact-Checking Platforms. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
830. Agnieszka Rychwalska, Geoffrey Goodell, Magda Roszczynska-Kurasinska. 2019. Data Management
for Platform-Mediated Public Services: Challenges and Best Practices. SSRN Electronic Journal .
[Crossref]
831. Junze Sun, Arthur J. H. C. Schram, Randolph Sloof. 2019. A Theory on Media Bias and Elections.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
832. Judit Bayer, Natalija Bitiukova, Petra Bard, Judit Szakács, Alberto Alemanno, Erik Uszkiewicz. 2019.
Disinformation and Propaganda – Impact on the Functioning of the Rule of Law in the EU and its
Member States. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
833. Anjie Fang, Philip Habel, Iadh Ounis, Craig MacDonald. 2019. Votes on Twitter: Assessing Candidate
Preferences and Topics of Discussion During the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election. SAGE Open 9:1,
215824401879165. [Crossref]
834. Nicolas M. Anspach, Jay T. Jennings, Kevin Arceneaux. 2019. A little bit of knowledge: Facebook’s
News Feed and self-perceptions of knowledge. Research & Politics 6:1, 205316801881618. [Crossref]
835. Fatemeh Torabi Asr, Maite Taboada. 2019. Big Data and quality data for fake news and misinformation
detection. Big Data & Society 6:1, 205395171984331. [Crossref]
836. Yangqian Wang, Hao Han, Ye Ding, Xuan Wang, Qing Liao. Learning Contextual Features with
Multi-head Self-attention for Fake News Detection 132-142. [Crossref]
837. Oğuzhan Taş, Tuğba Taş. 2018. Post-Hakikat Çağında Sosyal Medyada Yalan Haber ve Suriyeli
Mülteciler Sorunu. Galatasaray Üniversitesi İleti-ş-im Dergisi . [Crossref]
838. Mayela Zambrano. 2018. Latinas for Trump Analysis of Processes of Identification and the Use of
Narratives to Construct Subject-Positions. Pragmática Sociocultural / Sociocultural Pragmatics 6:2,
197-214. [Crossref]
839. Theodore Samore, Daniel M. T. Fessler, Colin Holbrook, Adam Maxwell Sparks. 2018. Electoral
fortunes reverse, mindsets do not. PLOS ONE 13:12, e0208653. [Crossref]
840. Robert Paluch, Xiaoyan Lu, Krzysztof Suchecki, Bolesław K. Szymański, Janusz A. Hołyst. 2018. Fast
and accurate detection of spread source in large complex networks. Scientific Reports 8:1. . [Crossref]
841. Dipti P. Rana, Ms. Isha Agarwal, Ms. Anjali More. A Review of Techniques to Combat The Peril
of Fake News 1-7. [Crossref]
842. Pragya Rawat, C. P. Gupta. User Response Based Information Quality Assessment of Social Media
News Posts 1-6. [Crossref]
843. Michael Nekrasov, Danny Iland, Miriam Metzger, Lisa Parks, Elizabeth Belding. 2018. A user-driven
free speech application for anonymous and verified online, public group discourse. Journal of Internet
Services and Applications 9:1. . [Crossref]
844. Chang Woo-Young. 2018. Information/Media Selection and Bias Mobilization : the Case of Taegeukgi rally. Korean Political Science Review 52:5, 87-113. [Crossref]
845. Chengcheng Shao, Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, Onur Varol, Kai-Cheng Yang, Alessandro Flammini,
Filippo Menczer. 2018. The spread of low-credibility content by social bots. Nature Communications
9:1. . [Crossref]
846. Saed Rezayi, Vimala Balakrishnan, Samira Arabnia, Hamid R Arabnia. Fake News and Cyberbullying
in the Modern Era 7-12. [Crossref]
847. Muhammed O. Sayin, Tamer Basar. Dynamic Information Disclosure for Deception * 1110-1117.
[Crossref]

848. A. Peters, E. Tartari, N. Lotfinejad, P. Parneix, D. Pittet. 2018. Fighting the good fight: the fallout
of fake news in infection prevention and why context matters. Journal of Hospital Infection 100:4,
365-370. [Crossref]
849. Des Freedman. 2018. Populism and media policy failure. European Journal of Communication 33:6,
604-618. [Crossref]
850. Mica R. Endsley. 2018. Combating Information Attacks in the Age of the Internet: New Challenges
for Cognitive Engineering. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
60:8, 1081-1094. [Crossref]
851. Ron Mahabir, Arie Croitoru, Andrew Crooks, Peggy Agouris, Anthony Stefanidis. 2018. News
coverage, digital activism, and geographical saliency: A case study of refugee camps and volunteered
geographical information. PLOS ONE 13:11, e0206825. [Crossref]
852. Heidi Zimmerman, Aaron Eddens. 2018. Governing the liberal self in a ‘post-truth’ era: science, class
and the debate over GMOs. Cultural Studies 32:6, 953-974. [Crossref]
853. Lee Ann Kahlor, Z. Janet Yang, Ming-Ching Liang. 2018. Risky Politics: Applying the Planned Risk
Information Seeking Model to the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election. Mass Communication and Society
21:6, 697-719. [Crossref]
854. Jonathan Supovitz, Alan J. Daly, Miguel Del Fresno. 2018. The Common Core debate on Twitter
and the rise of the activist public. Journal of Educational Change 19:4, 419-440. [Crossref]
855. Péter Kiszl, János Fodor. 2018. The “Collage Effect” – Against Filter Bubbles: Interdisciplinary
Approaches to Combating the Pitfalls of Information Technology. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship 44:6, 753-761. [Crossref]
856. Crystal Legacy, Dallas Rogers, Nicole Cook, Kristian Ruming. 2018. Beyond the post-political: is
public participation in Australian cities at a turning point?. Geographical Research 56:4, 353-357.
[Crossref]
857. Mingkun Gao, Ziang Xiao, Karrie Karahalios, Wai-Tat Fu. 2018. To Label or Not to Label. Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2:CSCW, 1-16. [Crossref]
858. Shan Jiang, Christo Wilson. 2018. Linguistic Signals under Misinformation and Fact-Checking.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2:CSCW, 1-23. [Crossref]
859. Ronald E. Robertson, Shan Jiang, Kenneth Joseph, Lisa Friedland, David Lazer, Christo Wilson.
2018. Auditing Partisan Audience Bias within Google Search. Proceedings of the ACM on HumanComputer Interaction 2:CSCW, 1-22. [Crossref]
860. Daniela Barberi, Eileen M. Ahlin, Donald C. Hummer, Shaun L. Gabbidon. 2018. Are Non-U.S.
Citizens Color-Blind? The Racialization of Violent Crimes. Race and Justice 31, 215336871880834.
[Crossref]
861. Martin Hirst. The Political Economy of Fake News 78-100. [Crossref]
862. Kayla Keener. Affect, Aesthetics, and Attention 205-214. [Crossref]
863. Eugène Loos, Loredana Ivan, Donald Leu. 2018. “Save the Pacific Northwest tree octopus”: a hoax
revisited. Or. Information and Learning Science 119:9/10, 514-528. [Crossref]
864. Nicole M. Lee. 2018. Fake news, phishing, and fraud: a call for research on digital media literacy
education beyond the classroom. Communication Education 67:4, 460-466. [Crossref]
865. Étienne Brown. 2018. Propaganda, Misinformation, and the Epistemic Value of Democracy. Critical
Review 30:3-4, 194-218. [Crossref]
866. David Hunt, Derek Robertson, Allison Pow. 2018. The Counselor’s Role in the Age of Social Media
and Fake News. Journal of Creativity in Mental Health 13:4, 405-417. [Crossref]

867. Nnanyelugo Okoro, Nathan Oguche Emmanuel. 2018. Beyond Misinformation: Survival Alternatives
for Nigerian Media in the “Post-Truth” Era. African Journalism Studies 39:4, 67-90. [Crossref]
868. Jari Salo, Matti Mäntymäki, A.K.M. Najmul Islam. 2018. The dark side of social media – and Fifty
Shades of Grey introduction to the special issue: the dark side of social media. Internet Research 28:5,
1166-1168. [Crossref]
869. Carola Binder, Alex Rodrigue. 2018. Household Informedness and Long-Run Inflation Expectations:
Experimental Evidence. Southern Economic Journal 85:2, 580-598. [Crossref]
870. Zaitul Iradah Mahid, Selvakumar Manickam, Shankar Karuppayah. Fake News on Social Media: Brief
Review on Detection Techniques 1-5. [Crossref]
871. Alton Y.K. Chua, Snehasish Banerjee. 2018. Intentions to trust and share online health rumors: An
experiment with medical professionals. Computers in Human Behavior 87, 1-9. [Crossref]
872. Paul Bleakley. 2018. Situationism and the recuperation of an ideology in the era of Trump, fake news
and post-truth politics. Capital & Class 42:3, 419-434. [Crossref]
873. J. Jumanto. How to control hate speech and hoaxes: Character language for character citizens 13-20.
[Crossref]
874. Karin Wahl-Jorgensen, Andrew Williams, Arne Hintz. 2018. Introduction. Digital Journalism 6:8,
945-950. [Crossref]
875. Neil Thurman, Robert G. Picard, Merja Myllylahti, Arne H. Krumsvik. On Digital Distribution’s
Failure to Solve Newspapers’ Existential Crisis 172-185. [Crossref]
876. Ágnes Veszelszki. 2018. Like economy: What is the economic value of likes?. Society and Economy
40:3, 417-429. [Crossref]
877. Martin McKee, David Stuckler. 2018. Revisiting the Corporate and Commercial Determinants of
Health. American Journal of Public Health 108:9, 1167-1170. [Crossref]
878. Pavel Korshunov, Sebastien Marcel. Speaker Inconsistency Detection in Tampered Video 2375-2379.
[Crossref]
879. Jason A. Parker, Daphne E. Whitmer, Valerie K. Sims. 2018. Warnings for Hurricane Irma: Trust of
Warning Type and Perceptions of Self-Efficacy and Susceptibility. Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 62:1, 1368-1372. [Crossref]
880. Brett G. Johnson, Kimberly Kelling. 2018. Placing Facebook. Journalism Practice 12:7, 817-833.
[Crossref]
881. Rens Vliegenthart, Mark Boukes. 2018. On the Street and/or on Twitter?. Digital Journalism 6:7,
829-846. [Crossref]
882. Timothy M. Hale, Wen-Ying Sylvia Chou, Shelia R. Cotten, Aneka Khilnani. Introduction: Promises
and Perils of eHealth 1-10. [Crossref]
883. Wonseok (Eric) Jang, Erik P. Bucy, Janice Cho. 2018. Self-esteem moderates the influence of selfpresentation style on Facebook users’ sense of subjective well-being. Computers in Human Behavior
85, 190-199. [Crossref]
884. Claudia Orellana-Rodriguez, Mark T. Keane. 2018. Attention to news and its dissemination on
Twitter: A survey. Computer Science Review 29, 74-94. [Crossref]
885. 2018. Call for papers: Exploring the dark side of social media. European Management Journal 36:4,
439-440. [Crossref]
886. Christian V. Baccarella, Timm F. Wagner, Jan H. Kietzmann, Ian P. McCarthy. 2018. Social media?
It's serious! Understanding the dark side of social media. European Management Journal 36:4, 431-438.
[Crossref]

887. Edson C Tandoc, Richard Ling, Oscar Westlund, Andrew Duffy, Debbie Goh, Lim Zheng Wei. 2018.
Audiences’ acts of authentication in the age of fake news: A conceptual framework. New Media &
Society 20:8, 2745-2763. [Crossref]
888. Gleb Tsipursky, Fabio Votta, James A. Mulick. 2018. A psychological approach to promoting truth
in politics: The pro-truth pledge. Journal of Social and Political Psychology 6:2, 271-290. [Crossref]
889. Russell Torres, Natalie Gerhart, Arash Negahban. 2018. Epistemology in the Era of Fake News. ACM
SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems 49:3, 78-97. [Crossref]
890. Levi Boxell, Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M. Shapiro. 2018. A note on internet use and the 2016 U.S.
presidential election outcome. PLOS ONE 13:7, e0199571. [Crossref]
891. Monika Kirner-Ludwig. Great pretenders 15-56. [Crossref]
892. Silvia Sommariva, Cheryl Vamos, Alexios Mantzarlis, Lillie Uyên-Loan Đào, Dinorah Martinez
Tyson. 2018. Spreading the (Fake) News: Exploring Health Messages on Social Media and the
Implications for Health Professionals Using a Case Study. American Journal of Health Education 49:4,
246-255. [Crossref]
893. Melissa Leigh Gibson. 2018. Scaffolding Critical Questions: Learning to Read the World in a Middle
School Civics Class in Mexico. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy 62:1, 25-34. [Crossref]
894. Ahmet Aker, Norbert Fuhr. 2018. The Information Retrieval Group at the University of DuisburgEssen. Datenbank-Spektrum 18:2, 113-119. [Crossref]
895. S. Mo Jang, Tieming Geng, Jo-Yun Queenie Li, Ruofan Xia, Chin-Tser Huang, Hwalbin Kim, Jijun
Tang. 2018. A computational approach for examining the roots and spreading patterns of fake news:
Evolution tree analysis. Computers in Human Behavior 84, 103-113. [Crossref]
896. Caroline L. Osborne. 2018. Programming to Promote Information Literacy in the Era of Fake News.
International Journal of Legal Information 46:2, 101-109. [Crossref]
897. Helena Webb, Menisha Patel. Can Video-based Qualitative Analysis Help Us Understand Useralgorithm Interaction? . [Crossref]
898. Bree McEwan, Christopher J. Carpenter, Jill E. Hopke. 2018. Mediated Skewed Diffusion of Issues
Information: A Theory. Social Media + Society 4:3, 205630511880031. [Crossref]
899. Alessandro Bucciol. 2018. False claims in politics: Evidence from the US. Research in Economics 72:2,
196-210. [Crossref]
900. Nik Rushdi Hassan, John Mingers, Bernd Stahl. 2018. Philosophy and information systems: where
are we and where should we go?. European Journal of Information Systems 27:3, 263-277. [Crossref]
901. Santosh Vijaykumar, Glen Nowak, Itai Himelboim, Yan Jin. 2018. Virtual Zika transmission after the
first U.S. case: who said what and how it spread on Twitter. American Journal of Infection Control
46:5, 549-557. [Crossref]
902. Hyun Keun Lee, Yong Woon Kim. 2018. Public opinion by a poll process: model study and Bayesian
view. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2018:5, 053402. [Crossref]
903. Marco L. Della Vedova, Eugenio Tacchini, Stefano Moret, Gabriele Ballarin, Massimo DiPierro, Luca
de Alfaro. Automatic Online Fake News Detection Combining Content and Social Signals 272-279.
[Crossref]
904. Chris J Vargo, Lei Guo, Michelle A Amazeen. 2018. The agenda-setting power of fake news: A big
data analysis of the online media landscape from 2014 to 2016. New Media & Society 20:5, 2028-2049.
[Crossref]
905. Theresa M. de los Santos, Elizabeth Smith, Mira Cohen. 2018. Targeting Truth: How Museums
Can Collaboratively Address Social Issues. Journal of Museum Education 43:2, 104-113. [Crossref]

906. Xiaotian Chen. 2018. Calling Out Fake News on Social Media: A Comparison of Literature in
Librarianship and Journalism. Internet Reference Services Quarterly 23:1-2, 1-13. [Crossref]
907. Nicholas W. Jankowski. 2018. Researching Fake News: A Selective Examination of Empirical Studies.
Javnost - The Public 25:1-2, 248-255. [Crossref]
908. Dominic D. Wells. 2018. You All Made Dank Memes: Using Internet Memes to Promote Critical
Thinking. Journal of Political Science Education 14:2, 240-248. [Crossref]
909. Marina Bagić Babac, Vedran Podobnik. 2018. What social media activities reveal about election results?
The use of Facebook during the 2015 general election campaign in Croatia. Information Technology
& People 31:2, 327-347. [Crossref]
910. Andrew S. Ross, Damian J. Rivers. 2018. Discursive Deflection: Accusation of “Fake News” and the
Spread of Mis- and Disinformation in the Tweets of President Trump. Social Media + Society 4:2,
205630511877601. [Crossref]
911. Mike Hynes. 2018. Shining a brighter light into the digital ‘black box’: A call for stronger sociological
(re)engagement with digital technology design, development and adoption debates. Irish Journal of
Sociology 26:1, 94-126. [Crossref]
912. David M. J. Lazer, Matthew A. Baum, Yochai Benkler, Adam J. Berinsky, Kelly M. Greenhill,
Filippo Menczer, Miriam J. Metzger, Brendan Nyhan, Gordon Pennycook, David Rothschild, Michael
Schudson, Steven A. Sloman, Cass R. Sunstein, Emily A. Thorson, Duncan J. Watts, Jonathan L.
Zittrain. 2018. The science of fake news. Science 359:6380, 1094-1096. [Crossref]
913. Alberto ALEMANNO. 2018. How to Counter Fake News? A Taxonomy of Anti-fake News
Approaches. European Journal of Risk Regulation 9:1, 1-5. [Crossref]
914. Gleb Tsipursky, Zachary Morford. 2018. Addressing Behaviors That Lead to Sharing Fake News.
Behavior and Social Issues 27, AA6-AA10. [Crossref]
915. Gleb Tsipursky, Fabio Votta, Kathryn M Roose. 2018. Fighting Fake News and Post-Truth Politics
with Behavioral Science: The Pro-Truth Pledge. Behavior and Social Issues 27, 47-70. [Crossref]
916. Edson C. Tandoc, Zheng Wei Lim, Richard Ling. 2018. Defining “Fake News”. Digital Journalism
6:2, 137-153. [Crossref]
917. Leon Barkho. Haktology, Trump, and News Practices 77-98. [Crossref]
918. Leon Barkho. Haktology, Trump, and News Practices 77-98. [Crossref]
919. Nic DePaula, Kaja J. Fietkiewicz, Thomas J. Froehlich, A.J. Million, Isabelle Dorsch, Aylin
Ilhan. 2018. Challenges for social media: Misinformation, free speech, civic engagement, and data
regulations. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology 55:1, 665-668.
[Crossref]
920. Shannon M. Oltmann, Thomas J. Froehlich, Denise E. Agosto. 2018. What do we do about “fake
news” and other forms of false information: The roles of the organization of false information,
professional ethics and information literacy?. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and
Technology 55:1, 719-721. [Crossref]
921. Jeff Z. Pan, Siyana Pavlova, Chenxi Li, Ningxi Li, Yangmei Li, Jinshuo Liu. Content Based Fake
News Detection Using Knowledge Graphs 669-683. [Crossref]
922. Genevieve Gorrell, Ian Roberts, Mark A. Greenwood, Mehmet E. Bakir, Benedetta Iavarone, Kalina
Bontcheva. Quantifying Media Influence and Partisan Attention on Twitter During the UK EU
Referendum 274-290. [Crossref]
923. Gerardo Ernesto Rolong Agudelo, Octavio José Salcedo Parra, Julio Barón Velandia. Raising a Model
for Fake News Detection Using Machine Learning in Python 596-604. [Crossref]
924. Severin Engelmann, Jens Grossklags, Orestis Papakyriakopoulos. A Democracy Called Facebook?
Participation as a Privacy Strategy on Social Media 91-108. [Crossref]

925. Seyed Mohssen Ghafari, Shahpar Yakhchi, Amin Beheshti, Mehmet Orgun. Social Context-Aware
Trust Prediction: Methods for Identifying Fake News 161-177. [Crossref]
926. Tooba Aamir, Hai Dong, Athman Bouguettaya. Stance and Credibility Based Trust in Social-Sensor
Cloud Services 178-189. [Crossref]
927. Shoko Kiyohara, Kazuhiro Maeshima, Diana Owen. Conclusion: The Development of Digital
Democracy in East Asia 189-205. [Crossref]
928. Robert N. Spicer. Lies, Damn Lies, Alternative Facts, Fake News, Propaganda, Pinocchios, Pants on
Fire, Disinformation, Misinformation, Post-Truth, Data, and Statistics 1-31. [Crossref]
929. Jamie Murphy, Ulrike Gretzel, Juho Pesonen, Anne-Liise Elorinne, Kirsi Silvennoinen. Household
Food Waste, Tourism and Social Media: A Research Agenda 228-239. [Crossref]
930. Catherine Zuckert. Trump as a Machiavellian Prince? Reflections on Corruption and American
Constitutionalism 73-87. [Crossref]
931. Lisa M. PytlikZillig, Myiah J. Hutchens, Peter Muhlberger, Frank J. Gonzalez, Alan J. Tomkins.
Knowledge 45-60. [Crossref]
932. Anna Sarmina. Fact-Checking as Defence Against Propaganda in the Digital Age 193-202. [Crossref]
933. Wenli Yang, Saurabh Garg, Ali Raza, David Herbert, Byeong Kang. Blockchain: Trends and Future
201-210. [Crossref]
934. Marius Rohde Johannessen. Genres of Participation in Social Networking Systems: A Study of the
2017 Norwegian Parliamentary Election 64-75. [Crossref]
935. Silvio Barta, Uwe Stoklossa. Without Design, It’s just a Lump of Gold — Future Developments in
Design as Luxury 317-346. [Crossref]
936. Bernd Zywietz. F wie Fake News – Phatische Falschmeldungen zwischen Propaganda und Parodie
97-131. [Crossref]
937. Chitat Chan. 2018. Analysing social networks for social work practice: A case study of the Facebook
fan page of an online youth outreach project. Children and Youth Services Review 85, 143-150.
[Crossref]
938. Yoshiteru Ishida, Sanae Kuraya. 2018. Fake News and its Credibility Evaluation by Dynamic Relational
Networks: A Bottom up Approach. Procedia Computer Science 126, 2228-2237. [Crossref]
939. Costel-Sergiu Atodiresei, Alexandru Tănăselea, Adrian Iftene. 2018. Identifying Fake News and Fake
Users on Twitter. Procedia Computer Science 126, 451-461. [Crossref]
940. Ethan Porter, Thomas J. Wood, David Kirby. 2018. Sex Trafficking, Russian Infiltration, Birth
Certificates, and Pedophilia: A Survey Experiment Correcting Fake News. Journal of Experimental
Political Science 5:2, 159-164. [Crossref]
941. Thomas Ferguson, Paul Jorgensen, Jie Chen. Industrial Structure and Political Outcomes: The Case
of the 2016 US Presidential Election 333-440. [Crossref]
942. Chengcheng Shao, Pik-Mai Hui, Pengshuai Cui, Xinwen Jiang, Yuxing Peng. 2018. Tracking and
Characterizing the Competition of Fact Checking and Misinformation: Case Studies. IEEE Access 6,
75327-75341. [Crossref]
943. Michael P. Kenning, Ryan Kelly, Simon L. Jones. Supporting Credibility Assessment of News in
Social Media using Star Ratings and Alternate Sources 1-6. [Crossref]
944. Ronald E. Robertson, David Lazer, Christo Wilson. Auditing the Personalization and Composition
of Politically-Related Search Engine Results Pages 955-965. [Crossref]
945. Mainul Quraishi, Pavlos Fafalios, Eelco Herder. Viewpoint Discovery and Understanding in Social
Networks 47-56. [Crossref]

946. Xi Niu, Wlodek Zadrozny, Kazjon Grace, Weimao Ke. Computational Surprise in Information
Retrieval 1427-1429. [Crossref]
947. Kevin Koidl, Owen Conlan, Wessel Reijers, Mark Farrell, Melissa Hoover. The BigFoot Initiative
120-127. [Crossref]
948. Yaqing Wang, Fenglong Ma, Zhiwei Jin, Ye Yuan, Guangxu Xun, Kishlay Jha, Lu Su, Jing Gao.
EANN 849-857. [Crossref]
949. Mary Jane C. Samonte. Polarity Analysis of Editorial Articles towards Fake News Detection 108-112.
[Crossref]
950. Md Momen Bhuiyan, Kexin Zhang, Kelsey Vick, Michael A. Horning, Tanushree Mitra. FeedReflect
205-208. [Crossref]
951. Xunru Che, Danaë Metaxa-Kakavouli, Jeffrey T. Hancock. Fake News in the News 289-292. [Crossref]
952. Giulio Angiani, Gaudioso Junior Balba, Paolo Fornacciari, Gianfranco Lombardo, Monica Mordonini,
Michele Tomaiuolo. Image-Based Hoax Detection 159-164. [Crossref]
953. Carlo Gabriel Porto Bellini, Vishal Shah. 2018. Organizations in an (Anti-)Information Age. BAR Brazilian Administration Review 15:3. . [Crossref]
954. Vivien Mantei, Joachim Griesbaum, Thomas Mandl. 2018. Fostering Information Literacy on the
Web: Results of a Game-Based Learning Scenario. International Journal of Information and Education
Technology 8:12, 861-867. [Crossref]
955. Michail Batikas, JJrg Claussen, Christian Peukert. 2018. Follow the Money: Online Piracy and SelfRegulation in the Advertising Industry. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
956. Anil R Doshi, Sharat Raghavan, Rebecca Weiss, Eric Petitt. 2018. The Impact of the Supply of Fake
News on Consumer Behavior During the 2016 US Election. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
957. Thomas Ferguson, Paul Jorgensen, Jie Chen. 2018. Industrial Structure and Party Competition in an
Age of Hunger Games: Donald Trump and the 2016 Presidential Election. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
958. Hendrik Bruns. 2018. Does Proclaimed Doubt in Media Spill Over to Doubt in Science? A Laboratory
Experiment in the Context of Climate Change. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
959. Bertin Martens, Luis Aguiar, Estrella GGmez, Frank Mueller-Langer. 2018. The Digital
Transformation of News Media and the Rise of Disinformation and Fake News. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
960. Lesley Chiou, Catherine E. Tucker. 2018. Fake News and Advertising on Social Media: A Study of
the Anti-Vaccination Movement. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
961. Cuihua Shen, Mona Kasra, Wenjing Pan, Grace Benefield, Yining Malloch, James O'Brien. 2018. Fake
Images: The Effects of Source, Intermediary, and Digital Media Literacy on Contextual Assessment
of Image Credibility Online. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
962. Chris Tenove, Jordan Buffie, Spencer McKay, David Moscrop. 2018. Digital Threats to Democratic
Elections: How Foreign Actors Use Digital Techniques to Undermine Democracy. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
963. Shuting Wang, Min-Seok Pang, Paul A. Pavlou. 2018. 'Cure or Poison?' Identity Verification and the
Spread of Fake News on Social Media. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
964. Yong Suk Lee. 2018. Social Media and Rigid Beliefs: Evidence from Impeachment of the President.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
965. Geyu Yang. 2018. Opinion Manipulation and Disagreement in Social Networks. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]

966. Patricia Moravec, Antino Kim, Alan R. Dennis, Randall Minas. 2018. Do You Really Know If It’s
True? How Asking Users to Rate Stories Affects Belief in Fake News on Social Media. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
967. Chandan Kumar Jha, Oasis Kodila-Tedika. 2018. Does Social Media Promote Democracy? Some
Empirical Evidence. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
968. Gregory D. Saxton. 2018. Social Media, Accounting Information Networks, and Market
Reaction: The Effects of Firm-to-Investor, Stakeholder-to-Investor, and Investor-to-Investor Twitter
Networks. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
969. Bernhard Clemm von Hohenberg. 2018. The Ocean of Possible Truth. Drivers and Consequences of
News Accuracy Judgements Online. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
970. Ron Mahabir, Arie Croitoru, Andrew Crooks, Peggy Agouris, Anthony Stefanidis. 2018. News
Coverage, Digital Activism, and Geographical Saliency: A Case Study of Refugee Camps and
Volunteered Geographical Information. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
971. Sangjun Yea. 2018. Persuasion under the Influence of Fake News. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
972. Hunt Allcott, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, Matthew Gentzkow. 2018. The Welfare Effects of
Social Media. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
973. Roberto Mosquera, Mofioluwasademi Odunowo, Trent McNamara, Xiongfei Guo, Ragan Petrie.
2018. The Economic Effects of Facebook. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
974. Rachel RJ Kalf, Amr Makady, Renske MT ten Ham, Kim Meijboom, Wim G Goettsch. 2018. Use of
Social Media in the Assessment of Relative Effectiveness: Explorative Review With Examples From
Oncology. JMIR Cancer 4:1, e11. [Crossref]
975. Chad E. Cook, Neil E. O'Connell, Toby Hall, Steven Z. George, Gwendolen Jull, Alexis A. Wright,
Enrique Lluch Girbés, Jeremy Lewis, Mark Hancock. 2018. Benefits and Threats to Using Social
Media for Presenting and Implementing Evidence. Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy
48:1, 3-7. [Crossref]
976. Mira Vidaković. 2018. Web 2.0, social media and the new paradigm of information media. Kultura
:160, 305-327. [Crossref]
977. Mathieu-Robert Sauvé. 2018. Être (bien) informé, c’est être libre !. Documentation et bibliothèques
64:4, 12. [Crossref]
978. Matteo Gamalerio, Mario Luca, Max Viskanic. 2018. Finding the Warmth of Other Suns? Refugee
Reception, Extreme Votes and Hate Crimes. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
979. Hedi Pudjo Santosa, Nurul Hasfi, Triyono Lukmantoro. 2018. Digital Media Unequality During the
2014th Indonesian Presidential Election. E3S Web of Conferences 73, 14006. [Crossref]
980. Rouli Manalu, Tandiyo Pradekso, Djoko Setyabudi. 2018. The from News Bearer to Extreme Speech
Propagator: Analysis of Shifting Practice in Production and Distribution of News on the Internet.
E3S Web of Conferences 73, 13011. [Crossref]
981. Anita Rao. 2018. Deceptive Claims using Fake News Marketing: The Impact on Consumers. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
982. Kevin Click, Cory Tondreau, Jannah Fusenig, Jordan Hutchings, Jordan Osejo, Neil Schwartz. 2018.
Truth-Detection in News Stories Presented with Correspondent Images. SSRN Electronic Journal .
[Crossref]
983. Shimon Kogan, Tobias J. Moskowitz, Marina Niessner. 2018. Fake News: Evidence from Financial
Markets. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
984. Andrea Robbett, Peter Hans Matthews. 2018. Partisan bias and expressive voting. Journal of Public
Economics 157, 107-120. [Crossref]

985. Dustin Tingley, Gernot Wagner. 2017. Solar geoengineering and the chemtrails conspiracy on social
media. Palgrave Communications 3:1. . [Crossref]
986. Richard Graham. 2017. Google and advertising: digital capitalism in the context of Post-Fordism, the
reification of language, and the rise of fake news. Palgrave Communications 3:1. . [Crossref]
987. Philogene Kyle Dimpas, Royce Vincent Po, Mary Jane Sabellano. Filipino and english clickbait
detection using a long short term memory recurrent neural network 276-280. [Crossref]
988. Alphia Possamai-Inesedy, Alan Nixon. 2017. A place to stand: Digital sociology and the Archimedean
effect. Journal of Sociology 53:4, 865-884. [Crossref]
989. Gary King, Benjamin Schneer, Ariel White. 2017. How the news media activate public expression
and influence national agendas. Science 358:6364, 776-780. [Crossref]
990. Ryan Kendall. 2017. Aligning Democracy: A Comment on Bruno S. Frey’s “Proposals for a Democracy
of the Future”. Homo Oeconomicus 34:2-3, 243-251. [Crossref]
991. Irvan Santoso, Immanuel Yohansen, Nealson, Harco Leslie Hendric Spits Warnars, Kiyota Hashimoto.
Early investigation of proposed hoax detection for decreasing hoax in social media 175-179. [Crossref]
992. Ali Ibrahim, Ermatita, Saparudin, Zefta Adetya. Analysis of weakness of data validation from social
CRM 1-5. [Crossref]
993. Nir Kshetri, Jeffrey Voas. 2017. The Economics of “Fake News”. IT Professional 19:6, 8-12. [Crossref]
994. Jonas De keersmaecker, Arne Roets. 2017. ‘Fake news’: Incorrect, but hard to correct. The role of
cognitive ability on the impact of false information on social impressions. Intelligence 65, 107-110.
[Crossref]
995. Ian Goldin. 2017. The second Renaissance. Nature 550:7676, 327-329. [Crossref]
996. Stefan Stieglitz, Milad Mirbabaie, Jennifer Fromm. 2017. Understanding Sense-Making on Social
Media During Crises. International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management
9:4, 49-69. [Crossref]
997. Dominic Spohr. 2017. Fake news and ideological polarization. Business Information Review 34:3,
150-160. [Crossref]
998. 2017. Promoting health in a post-truth world. Health Promotion International 32:4, 599-602.
[Crossref]
999. Youjung Jun, Rachel Meng, Gita Venkataramani Johar. 2017. Perceived social presence reduces factchecking. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114:23, 5976-5981. [Crossref]
1000. Dan M. Kahan. 2017. Misconceptions, Misinformation, and the Logic of Identity-Protective
Cognition. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1001. Maxim Ananyev, Maria Petrova. 2017. Information and Communication Technologies, Protests, and
Censorship. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1002. Antino Kim. 2017. Says Who?: How News Presentation Format Influences Perceived Believability
and the Engagement Level of Social Media Users. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1003. Julia Cage. 2017. Media Competition, Information Provision and Political Participation: Evidence
from French Local Newspapers and Elections, 1944-2014. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1004. Yiangos Papanastasiou. 2017. Fake News Propagation and Detection: A Sequential Model. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1005. Dan M. Kahan. 2017. Misinformation and Identity-Protective Cognition. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
1006. Ozan Candogan, Kimon Drakopoulos. 2017. Optimal Signaling of Content Accuracy: Likes vs. Fake
News. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]

1007. Lucas de Lima Carvalho. 2017. The Case Against Fake News Gatekeeping by Social Networks. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1008. Danaa Metaxa-Kakavouli, Nicolls Torres-Echeverry. 2017. Google's Role in Spreading Fake News
and Misinformation. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1009. Evan D. Sadler. 2017. False Information and Disagreement in Social Networks. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
1010. Antino Kim, Patricia Moravec, Alan R. Dennis. 2017. Behind the Stars: The Effects of News Source
Ratings on Fake News in Social Media. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1011. Luis R. Martinez. 2017. How Much Should We Trust the Dictator's GDP Estimates?. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1012. Miruna Craciunescu. 2017. Chassé croisé Lavocat/Ginzburg. Sens public . [Crossref]
1013. Nitin Verma, Kenneth R. Fleischmann, Kolina S. Koltai. 2017. Human values and trust in scientific
journals, the mainstream media and fake news. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science
and Technology 54:1, 426-435. [Crossref]
1014. Fabrizio Germano, Francesco Sobbrio. 2016. Opinion Dynamics via Search Engines (and Other
Algorithmic Gatekeepers). SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1015. Shintaro Miura. 2015. Manipulated News Model: Electoral Competition and Mass Media. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1016. Evan D. Sadler. 2015. Diffusion Games. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1017. Markus Baldauf, Joshua Mollner. 2015. Fast Traders Make a Quick Buck: The Role of Speed in
Liquidity Provision. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1018. Russell Golman, George F. Loewenstein. 2012. Curiosity, Information Gaps, and the Utility of
Knowledge. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
1019. Christine Yunn-Yu Sun, Steve Goschnick. Formation and Control of Identity 286-323. [Crossref]

