Classificatory Notes on the Production and Transmission of Technological Knowledge
Author(s): Kenneth J. Arrow
Source: The American Economic Review , May, 1969, Vol. 59, No. 2, Papers and
Proceedings of the Eighty-first Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association
(May, 1969), pp. 29-35
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1823650
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1823650?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Economic
Review

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

CLASSIFICATORY NOTES ON THE PRODUCTION AND
TRANSMISSION OF TECHNOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE
By KENNETH J. ARROW
Harvard University

I. Introduction

bias is itself induced by economic considerations. Fellner [3] convincingly argued

Analysis of production functions over

that factor prices, per se, should have no

the last twelve years has suggested

tendency to cause bias, since the aim of

strongly that (a) a major proportion of

the entrepreneur is to minimize the total

the increase in per capita income cannot
be explained by increases in the capital-labor ratio, and (b) production functions

of costs. Kennedy [5] then sought to
carry the Fellner analysis further by in-

troducing explicitly the trade-offs between

differ strongly among nations and indeed
among regions. Since a production function is defined relative to a given body of
technological knowledge, (a) implies that
technological knowledge has been growing
over time and (b) that technological
knowledge varies over countries.
An economist could just leave the analysis at that, asserting that the causes
which determine the amount of technological knowledge at any one time and place
lie as much outside his province as the
tastes which determine consumption patterns. But in fact, we know that significant quantities of resources are being expended by profit-making institutions on
research and development. From the studies of Griliches [4] and Mansfield [8,
Part IV], we know that the diffusion of
technological knowledge, at least within a
given economy, is partly governed by
profitability considerations. Hence, it is
suggested, we must regard the body of
technological knowledge as the result as
well as the cause of economic changes.
Economists have had a further, more

different possible biases in innovation.
Kennedy, like most other current writers,

has tended to replace the Hicks classifica-

tion by introducing a more explicit and restricted model of technological change,
namely, factor augmentation:

(1) Y = F[A(t) K, B(t) L]
where Y is output, K is capital, L is labor,

and A(t) and B(t) are the total augmentations of capital and labor, respectively.
Then there is postulated a "transformation function" for knowledge, in the form

of a trade-off among the rates of growth
of A and B and research expenditures.
Models of this type and others (e.g.,
Arrow [1]) have the natural motivation

of using the well-tried tools of production
and distribution theory in what appears to

be a related field. "Knowledge," as reflected in the variables A and B, appears
as an input to physical output, and we
then need to supplement the ordinary pro-

duction relation with an additional relation determining these newly defined inputs.

detailed, preoccupation: that of the bias
of technological change. A production
function, if it shifts due to increased
knowledge, can shift in many ways. In a
two-factor model, Hicks spoke of "capital-saving" and "laborsaving" innovations and raised the question whether the

It is the suggestion of this paper that

such models, though they may well be
useful descriptively (however, this remains to be tested empirically), do not
capture the essential features of the creation and transmission of knowledge. Tech29

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

30 AMERICAN ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION
nological progress is in the first instance

the reduction in uncertainty. The product
of a research and development effort is an
observation on the world which reduces
its possible range of variation. The outputs of different research projects are
qualitatively different; there is no gain in
acquiring the same information twice. The
production of knowledge is thus basically
different in character from the production
of goods, where successive items can be
qualitatively identical. The research and
development process indeed has quantitative implications for factor productivity,
particularly if it is measured at a relatively aggregated level, but these implications are a far from exhaustive description
of the research and development process
itself.

Research and development is thus intimately connected with the problems of
uncertainty reduction which have been the

objects of research in mathematical statistics and information theory. The problem
of the transmission of knowledge-why
different individuals and nations do not
have access to equal bodies of knowledge
even more clearly requires analysis of
qualitative distinctness of different items
of information. Here the disciplines of information and communication theory,
learning theory in psychology, and diffusion theory in sociology may be brought
to bear.
The remainder of this paper will be devoted to elaborations and exemplifications
of these themes. It cannot be claimed that
any usable model has yet emerged, but it
is hoped that the remarks here will be useful in further developments.

II. The Production of Knowledge
Knowledge arises from deliberate seeking, but it also arises from observations
incidental on other activities. Haavelmo,
Kaldor, and I (see Arrow [1] for references) have all stressed that the activities

of production and investment may lead to
increases in productivity without any
identifiable allocation of resources to that
end. An illuminating special case of increased knowledge is the discovery of natural resources. Exploration is analogous to
research; but when a community is becoming settled, the members, in the course
of their ordinary activities, frequently
continue to make unexpected discoveries.
Sutter established an agricultural community; his employee, Marshall, saw some
yellow flecks in the mill race.
A more general formulation including
both research and learning by doing can
be formulated and will, I think, be useful.
The Bayesian language will be used (for
an excellent introduction, see Raiffa [11,
Chaps. 1-5]); however, any sensible
analysis of uncertainty will lead to equivalent formulations. Let the term "activity" be used, as usual for any process described by inputs and outputs, but we are
particularly interested in the case where
the outputs are not known with certainty.
It can easily happen that the outcomes for
different activities will be dependent random variables in the sense of a subjective
probability. The case most interesting
from the present point of view is that
where there is an underlying unknown
parameter upon which the probability distributions of outcomes for the different activities depend; then observing the outcome of one activity changes the a posteriori distribution of outcomes of the other.
This need not happen of course; if the
outcome of an activity is known with certainty a priori, then observing the outcome cannot change the probabilities of
outcome of any other activity. More generally, if there is statistical independence

between the outcomes of activities, the
probability of distribution of the outcomes
of one is unaffected by observations on
the outcomes of another. Thus, if I really
believe a pair of dice is fair, observing

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THEORY OF INNOVATION 31

quired are relevant to the choice is in
principle a problem of statistical decision
theory, but in fact only fragmentary results
have been attained. Analytically, the
subjective probability distribution over
question
is difficult, and, perhaps not surthe possible outcomes, then observing an
prisingly,
the results that have been atoutcome certainly does change my subsetained
can
hardly be stated simply,
quent expectations in accordance with
though
definite
methods of computing the
Bayes's theorem.
optimal
solutions
exist. (In my judgment,
Thus, an activity will in general have
this
will
be
an
increasingly
common situatwo valuable consequences: the physical
tion in economic theory; broad general
outputs themselves and the change in intheorems of the kind we admire can usuformation about other activities.
ally only be found under undesirably reIn many cases, one or the other effect
strictive conditions. What theory can
predominates. The classical research situimply in a broad range of cases is a comation is one in which the actual output
puting algorithm. To test theory, then, we
(e.g., of nylon) is of negligible imporneed econometric evidence or at least
tance compared to the information gain
well-informed quantitative judgments as
-a posteriori the probability that a subinputs to the computing process.) Some
stance with the properties of nylon can be
beginnings of a microeconomic theory of
produced is now 1, whereas a priori it
research and development are found in
may have been a small figure. In the cases
the work of T. Marschak, Glennan and
of learning by doing the opposite holds;
Nelson (see [10, Chaps. 1, 2 and 5]).
the motivation for engaging in the activity
Building a macroeconomic theory on
is the physical output, but there is an admicroeconomic foundations is not an easy
ditional gain, which may be relatively
task; indeed, there is not one completely
small, in information which reduces the
successful example. But in the case of the
cost of further production.
production of knowledge, the task is apOnce these polar cases are presented, it
parently much harder. To proceed from
becomes clear that intermediate cases are
an individual to a collective theory that
possible, and in fact they not only occur
consumption depends on income or output
but are, I would hold, frequent. In fact,
on inputs involves incompletely justified
the bulk of research and development exsteps; but it is at least reasonably clear
penditures are actual steps in the producwhat the aggregates themselves are. Infortion process-design, engineering, tooling,
mation at the individual level is describand manufacturing and marketing startable either as the actual outcome of a parup costs (see Mansfield [7, p. 106]).
ticular activity or as a whole conditional
Each stage involves uncertainties with regard to costs and, at the end, with regard distribution over states of nature, with the
to demand. At each stage, then, something conditions being the actual outcomes.
Such a probability distribution is hard to
is learned with regard to the probability
describe in any simple way, and aggregatdistribution of outcomes for future repetitions of the activity. At the same time, the ing this information over individuals is
even harder.
physical outputs are expected to be diGiven the probabity distribution at any
rectly valuable.
moment of time, individuals make producThe problem of the optimal choice of a
tion decisions. The actual outputs are not
sequence of activities where both the
known with certainty, but one might plauphysical outcome and the information acany outcome is of no use in predicting a
subsequent one. But if I suspect bias and
I express my suspicions by an appropriate

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

32 AMERICAN ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION
sibly take their expected value and regard
its relation to the inputs as the production

function. This will shift over time as additional information is acquired. The current models in the growth field assume
(a) that the effect of a given body of information on the production function can
be summarized in a few parameters and
(b) that these same parameters summarize the possibilities for acquiring new information. The first assumption is un-

doubtedly essential if one is to get anywhere. But the second is on the face of it

very misleading. Consider an economy
with labor as the only factor of production and operating under constant returns
to scale. Then the effect of any given information structure on the production
function is completely summarized in the

output-labor ratio. But a given output-labor ratio may correspond to very different

information structures and therefore very
different potentialities for future productivity increases. One might have been
based on very thorough exploration of
limited areas of investigation, with little
further room for increased knowledge,
while the other might have investigated
more widely and have potential productivity gains available at little additional cost.
Securities analysts use such considerations
in their evaluations; and historical examples of this difference are frequently cited.
One might be tempted to consider as an
alternative measure of aggregate knowledge Shannon's measure of information.
There are of course a host of practical difficulties in applying this measure to technological knowledge. But unfortunately it
does not seem to be a correct measure for

either the supply or the demand side. The
irrelevance of Shannon's measure to the
demand price for knowledge was shown
by J. Marschak [9]. To take an extreme
case, consider two states of the world
which are indistinguishable with regard to
technology; e.g., distinguished only with

regard to the number of craters on the
dark side of the moon. Any discrimination
between these two states would be an increase in information, but surely not one
relevant to productivity. On the supply
side, similarly, the cost of achieving a
given increase in information may differ
according to the particular observations
made.

III. Transmission of Knowledge

The observer of the outcome of an activity can be supposed to form new probability judgments; but how does this affect the information structures of others?
The transmission of the observation or of
the revised probability judgments must
take place over channels which have a
limited capacity and are therefore costly.
Though the language is borrowed from
communications theory, the really limited
channels are human minds, not telegraphs
or printed words.

Even for the individual there is a problem of channel capacity. To transform his
a priori into a posteriori probabilities as
the result of observations which have
taken time, he must remember his a priori
probabilities; but memory is a channel for
transmission between points of time and is
notoriously limited in capacity and subject to error. Natural memory can of
course be supplemented with artificial aids
books, files, computer memories-but
ultimately there remains a capacity limitation. As a result, even for an individual,
the transformation of probabilities and
therefore the acquisition of information is
less than ideal. Winter in an unpublished
paper has argued that memory limitation
accounts for the results of the famous
Humphreys experiment which has been so
crucial in modern learning theory: An
event E occurs with probability p > a2
on each of a succession of trials, with
independence between trials. The individual is asked before each trial to predict

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THEORY OF INNOVATION 33

whether or not E will occur; he is not told
the value of p but must in effect infer it
from observations. If his aim is to maxi-

mize the expected number of successes,
the rational strategy would be always to
predict E, at least after the process has
been observed long enough to establish al-

clude the ability of the sender to "code"
the information and the recipient to "decode" it.
The understanding of transmission of
knowledge is of especial importance in

two of the key socioeconomic problems of
our time: (a) international inequalities in
most certainly that p > Y2. But in fact productivity, and (b) the failure of the
educational system in reducing, income inthe subjects wind up predicting sometimes
equality. The two problems have a considE and sometimes not E, and the freerable formal similarity. If one nation or
quency with which E is predicted apclass has the knowledge which enables
proaches very closely indeed to p. This
it to achieve high productivity, why is
might be explained by the assumption
not the other acquiring that information?
that they only remember a limited number
That a nation or class has a consistently
of previous observations and thus never
high productivity implies a successful
can be very well assured that it is best to
communication system within the nation
predict E. (To be sure, many other explaor class, so the problem turns on the difnations have been advanced in the literaferential between costs of communication
ture.)
within and between classes.
There have been studies by both econo(It is not intended to assert that diffimists and sociologists on the diffusion of
culties in communication of information
innovations; the relation between the two
are necessarily the sole source of total factypes of studies resembles nothing so
much as the parable of the blind men and
the elephant. WVhile Griliches and Mansfield stress the profitability of the investment and the risks involved, the sociologists (see, e.g., Rogers [12] and, for a
more theoretical treatment, Coleman [2,
Chap. 17]) are concerned with the nature
of the channel connecting the adopters of

tor productivity differences. There can be
withholding of information to perpetuate

monopoly positions; and both in foreign
trade and in economic relations between
the races, income differentials can arise
from exploitation; see Krueger [6].
There might also be genetic factors. But
the available evidence certainly suggests

that communication problems are a major
and perhaps predominant source of productivity and income differentials.)
alerting individuals to the possibility of an
It may be worthwhile speculating on
innovation, it seems to be personal contact
some of the causes of these differential
that is most relevant in leading to its
channel costs. Note first that all the socioadoption. Thus, the diffusion of an innological work on diffusion has put great
vation becomes a process formally akin to
stress on personal contact. Mass media
the spread of an infectious disease.
may provide some overall alertness to
There is nothing irreconcilable in the
two viewpoints: in effect, the economistschange, but, except for the most alert and
are studying the demand for informationdaring innovators, it is the example and
advice of those known personally that are
by potential innovators and sociologists the
apparently
most potent in securing accepproblems in the supply of communication
tance
of
innovation.
As Coleman stresses,
channels. Different communication chanhowever,
personal
contacts are by no
nels have different costs (or, equivalently,
means
randomly
distributed
in the popudifferent capacities), where these costs inan innovation with potential followers.
While mass media play a major role in

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

34 AMERICAN ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION
racial differences
in the meaning of words,
lation, and the manner in which
any trait
not so much in the literal
denotation, but
(in particular, an item of information)
is
in the connotations and associations, and
diffused throughout the system is correin the significance of nonverbal behavior.
spondingly altered. To cite one case, the
diffusion of use of new drugs was higher In the complicated interplay of messages
between teacher and student, the unreliaamong physicians practicing in pairs than

among those practicing singly.

bilities of communication can lead to ex-

treme inefficiencies.
I believe these facts cast light on the
basic factors at work in the difficulties of
IV. Exponential Growth and Stationary
transmission of knowledge across nations
Bias
and through the educational system. Two
To conclude, we might briefly consider
general principles may be suggested: (1)
two aspects of current growth models
A channel has greater capacity if the rewhich are inconsistent with models of
ceiver regards it as more reliable; this is
technological progress as informationwhy personal contacts are frequently so
important. (2) To a large extent, channels seeking and transmitting.
One is the universal tendency to take
of communication serve purposes other
than the diffusion of innovations-friend- some form of rate of growth of productivity as a variable of the system. Typically
ship, convenience-and the direction of
diffusion may be dictated by factors in ad-the model ends up in a quasi-stationary
dition to profitability. Thus international state with a constant rate of productivity
growth. Now no known form of adaptive
channels, which typically have less other
model, with probabilities modified by expurposes to serve, are more expensive. In
perience, leads to such a result; on the
particular, and this may be very imporcontrary, such models invariably lead to
tant, personal contacts across nations are
asymptotes in which output is constant.
obviously much less than within.
There is a limit to what can be learned
In amplification of (1), there is one
even with infinitely many opportunities.
special case of unreliability from the reActually, with respect to the very long
ceiver's point of view that deserves some
run, such a conclusion seems very reasonattention: the inability of the receiver to
able. You cannot get something for nothunderstand the message. As already remarked, every piece of information can being, ever, and it seems unreasonable to

suppose that, by waiting a sufficient
regarded as transmitted in a code and can
length of time, you can get any given outonly be used if decoded. In the first instance, a language itself is a code, and the put for arbitrarily small input. Eternal exsheer difficulty of translation perhaps can ponential technological growth is just as
unreasonable as eternal exponential popube underestimated. (The inability of Enlation growth.
glish-speaking economists to learn from
But of course exponential technological
their French, German, and Italian colgrowth does have the advantage of being
leagues is notorious.) There are problems
consistent with the observed facts; if anyin nonverbal forms of communication.
thing, the observed rate of growth of total
When the British in World War II supplied us with the plans for the jet engine,factor productivity is increasing. I can

it took ten months to redraw them to con-

form to American usage. More subtly, as
several gifted observers of the educational

scene have observed, there are class and

only conjecture that, as in the case of pop-

ulation, the true law is something like the
logistic curve, but we are still in the early
phases, which resemble the exponential.

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THEORY OF INNOVATION 35
At the moment, that is, each new item of

may have had a good deal to do with mo-

information opens up the opportunity for

tivating Columbus' voyages, but the
brute, though unknown, facts of geography determined what in fact was their
economic results.

acquiring additional items in a constant
ratio (in some sense), but eventually the

scarcity of additional information will become apparent.

REFERENCES

The other aspect is the Kennedy invention-possibility curve, the trade-off between rates of augmentation of different
factors for a given research budget. In the
first place, there is, of course, no warrant

for assuming that technological progress is
factor-augmenting; pieces of knowledge
about the workings of the world need not
be associated in any simple way with different factors of production. In the second

1. K. J. ARROW, "The Economic Implica-

tions of Learning by Doing," Rev. of

Econ. Studies, June, 1962, pp. 155-73.
2. J. S. COLEMAN, Introduction to Mathematical Sociology (Free Press, 1964).

3. W. FELLNER, "Does the Market Direct

the Relative Factor-Saving Effects of
Technological Progress?" in The Rate

and Direction of Inventive Activity
(Princeton, 1962), pp. 171-88.

place, as already remarked, in the long

4. Z. GRILICHES, "Hybrid Corn: An Explo-

run, it is unlikely that rates of augmenta-

ration in the Economics of Technological

tion are the right variables to enter into
any such relation. But most important,

501-22.

there is no warrant for the stability of the
curve over time, however it is described.
The curve of efficient possible innovations

at any time must surely shift with the
particular nature of the information acquired, a nature not summed up in productivity measures of any kind. My conjecture is that this is one place where
theory should not presume to take the
place of history. The set of opportunities
for innovation at any one moment are determined by what the physical laws of the
world really are and how much has already been learned and is therefore "acci-

dental" from the viewpoint of economics.
My guess is that economic factors have
little to do with bias in technological progress (though they may have a good deal
to do with its magnitude). European desire for spices in the late fifteenth century

Change," Econometrica, Oct., 1957, pp.
5. C. KENNEDY, "Induced Bias in Innova-

tion and the Theory of Distribution,"
Econ. J., Sept., 1964, pp. 541-47.
6. A. 0. KRUEGER, "The Economics of Dis-

crimination," J.P.E., Oct., 1963, pp.
481-86.

7. E. MANSFIELD, The Economics of Technological Change (Norton, 1968).
8. , Industrial Research and Technological Innovation (Norton, 1968).
9. J. MARSCHAK, "Remarks on the Economics of Information," in Contributions to
Scientific Research in Management
(Western Data Processing Center, Univ.
of California, 1960), pp. 79-98.
10. T. MARSCHAK, T. K. GLENNAN, JR., AND

R. SUMMERS, Strategy for R&R (New
York, Springer, 1967).

11. H. RAIFFA, Decision Analysis (AddisonWesley, 1968).
12. E. ROGERS, Diffusion of Innovations
(Free Press, 1962).

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Wed, 20 Jan 2021 19:23:19 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

