Understanding Booms and Busts
in Housing Markets

Craig Burnside
Duke University, University of Glasgow, and National Bureau of Economic Research

Martin Eichenbaum
Northwestern University, National Bureau of Economic Research, and Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago

Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University, National Bureau of Economic Research, and Centre for Economic
Policy Research

Some booms in housing prices are followed by busts. Others are not.
It is generally difficult to find observable fundamentals that are useful for predicting whether a boom will turn into a bust or not. We develop a model consistent with these observations. Agents have heterogeneous expectations about long-run fundamentals but change their
views because of “social dynamics.” Agents with tighter priors are more
likely to convert others to their beliefs. Boom-bust episodes typically occur when skeptical agents happen to be correct. The booms that are
not followed by busts typically occur when optimistic agents happen to
be correct.

I. Introduction
Some booms in housing prices are followed by busts. Others are not.
It is generally difficult to find observable fundamentals that are useful
We thank Eric Aldrich, Fernando Alvarez, Veronica Guerrieri, Lars Hansen, Peter Howitt,
John Leahy, Monika Piazzesi, Martin Schneider, Rob Shimer, Susan Woodward, and six anonElectronically published July 1, 2016
[ Journal of Political Economy, 2016, vol. 124, no. 4]
© 2016 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/2016/12404-0005$10.00

1088

booms and busts in housing markets

1089

for predicting whether a boom will turn into a bust or not. We develop a
model that is consistent with this observation. Agents have heterogeneous expectations about long-run fundamentals. Some agents are optimistic while others are not. Agents change their views as a result of “social dynamics.” They meet randomly, and those with tighter priors are
more likely to convert other agents to their beliefs. The model generates
a “fad” in the sense that the fraction of the population with a particular
view rises and then falls. These fads lead to boom-busts or protracted
booms in house prices, even if uncertainty about fundamentals is not realized. According to our model, an econometrician would not be able
to predict whether a boom will turn into a bust or not. The reason is that
before uncertainty is realized, the data are not informative about which
agent is correct.1
Our model has three features. First, there is uncertainty about the longrun fundamentals that drive house prices. We assume that in each period,
there is a small probability that housing fundamentals will change permanently to a new value. This emphasis on long-run fundamentals is related
to the literature on long-run risk (Bansal and Yaron 2004; Hansen, Heaton,
and Li 2008).
Second, as in Harrison and Kreps (1978), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003),
Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, and Yildiz (2007), Dumas, Kurshev, and Uppal
(2009), Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), and Geanakoplos (2010), agents
in our economy have heterogeneous beliefs about fundamentals. Some
agents believe that housing fundamentals will improve while others do
not. Agents can update their priors in a Bayesian fashion. However, the
data do not convey useful information about long-run fundamentals, so
agents’ priors stay constant over time. In other words, agents agree to disagree, and this disagreement persists over time. One group of agents is correct in their views about future fundamentals, but there is no way to know
ex ante which group that is.
The third feature of the model is an element that we refer to as “social dynamics.” Agents meet randomly with each other, and some agents
change their priors about long-run fundamentals as a result of these meetings. We use the entropy of an agent’s probability distribution of future
fundamentals to measure the uncertainty of his views. We assume that
when agent i meets agent j, the probability that i adopts the prior of j is
decreasing (increasing) in the entropy of the prior of i ( j ). In other words,
ymous referees for their comments. We also thank Yana Gallen and Andreas Neuhierl for research assistance.
1
Models in which agents have homogeneous expectations can also generate protracted
movements in house prices (see, e.g., Zeira 1999; Chu 2014). But these models generally
imply a close relation between house prices and fundamentals that is difficult to see in the
data. Glaeser and Gyourko (2006) argue that it is difficult to explain the observed large
changes in house prices with changes in incomes, amenities, or interest rates.

1090

journal of political economy

agents with tighter priors are more likely to convert other agents to their
beliefs. Our model generates dynamics in the fraction of agents who
hold different views that are similar to those generated by the infectiousdisease models proposed by Bernoulli (1766) and Kermack and McKendrick (1927).2
We consider two cases. In the first case, the agents with the tightest priors are those who expect fundamentals to remain the same. In the second
case, the agents with the tightest priors are those who expect fundamentals to improve. In the absence of realization of uncertainty about longrun fundamentals, the model generates fads. In the first case, there is a
rise and fall in the number of people who believe that buying a house is
a good investment. Here, the model generates a protracted boom-bust
cycle. In the second case, there is a rise and fall in the number of people
who believe that housing fundamentals will not change. Here, the model
generates a protracted boom in housing prices that is not followed by a
bust.
We use the model to compute the price path expected by different
agents. These unconditional expected price paths take into account the
probability of uncertainty being realized at each point in time. Regardless
of which agent happens to be correct, the model has the following implications. Agents who think that fundamentals will improve expect prices
to rise and then level off. Agents who think that fundamentals will not
change expect prices to rise and then fall. An econometrician taking repeated samples from data generated by the model would see both boombusts and booms that are not followed by busts. The boom-bust episodes
typically occur in economies in which agents who do not expect fundamentals to improve happen to be correct. The episodes in which booms
are not followed by busts typically occur in economies in which agents
who expect fundamentals to improve happen to be correct. Of course,
in any given economy an econometrician would not be able to predict
ex ante which type of episode would occur.
We first study the implications of social dynamics in a frictionless assetpricing model of the housing market. While useful for building intuition, the model is too stylized to account for various features of the data.
For this reason, we embed our model of social dynamics into a matching model of the housing market of the sort considered by Piazzesi and
Schneider (2009). As these authors show, a small number of optimists can
have a large impact on housing prices. However, heterogeneity in beliefs
per se is not enough to generate protracted booms or booms and busts
2
There is a growing literature that provides evidence on the importance of social dynamics in equity markets. See, e.g., Kelly and Ó Gráda (2000), Duflo and Saez (2002), Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2005), Brown et al. (2008), and Kaustia and Knüpfer (2008).

booms and busts in housing markets

1091

of the sort observed in the data. Here, social dynamics play a key role by
changing the fraction of agents who hold different views about future fundamentals. In our model these changes introduce nontrivial dynamics into
house prices.
We calibrate the six parameters of our model that control the distribution of beliefs and their dynamics to match nine moments constructed
from micro evidence on agents’ expectations of future house prices and
self-assessed values of agents’ homes. Even though we work with an overidentified system, our model does a good job of accounting for the moments that we target. We choose a separate set of parameters so that the
steady state of the model is consistent with long-run properties of the US
housing market.
The data on expectations come from Case and Shiller (2010). In each
year for which we have the survey data, we include the following moments in the calibration procedure: the mean, across those surveyed, of
the 1-year-ahead expected increase in home prices and the difference between the mean and median of the same forecast. The first set of moments
is relevant for obvious reasons: We want our model of social dynamics to
be consistent with the expected house price appreciation during the recent boom-bust episode. The second set of moments is relevant because,
in a model with homogeneous expectations, the difference between the
mean and median expected appreciation in house prices is zero. In contrast, our model does well at capturing the average value of this statistic
over the boom part of the episode.
The data on self-assessed values of agents’ homes come from the American Housing Survey. These data reveal that, as US house prices appreciated, the gap between the mean and median values of what agents reported their homes were worth widened. Social dynamics, which imply a
rise in the number of optimistic agents during the boom, provide a natural
explanation for this widening gap. Our model does quite well at accounting for the differences between the self-assessed mean minus median
home values reported in the American Housing Survey for the 2003–6
period, which are moments targeted by our calibration procedure. Significantly, the model is also consistent with the magnitude and rise in the
mean relative to median self-assessed home values before 2003. It does
so even though these moments are not targeted by our calibration procedure. Social dynamics are the key to the model’s success along this dimension since they generate a cross section of beliefs that evolves over
time.
Finally, we present some evidence on three other central implications
of our model. First, booms (busts) are marked by increases (decreases) in
the number of agents who buy homes only because of large expected capital gains. Second, the probability of selling a home is positively correlated

1092

journal of political economy

with house prices. Third, sales volume is positively correlated with house
prices. We find support for all three implications in the data. More generally, we argue that the extensive margin of the number of potential home
buyers plays a critical role in house price dynamics.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
study the implications of social dynamics in a frictionless asset-pricing
model of the housing market. Section III presents a simple matching
model of the housing market and describes its transition dynamics. Section IV incorporates social dynamics into the matching model and generates our main results. We discuss the model calibration procedure in
Section V and the model’s quantitative properties in Section VI. In Section VII, we present empirical evidence regarding the key mechanisms at
work in the model. Section VIII contains concluding remarks.
II. Social Dynamics in a Frictionless Model
In this section we consider a simple frictionless model of the housing
market. We use this model to describe the role played by social dynamics
and the implied movements in the fraction of agents with different beliefs about long-run fundamentals.
A.

The Model Economy

The economy is populated by a continuum of agents with measure one.
All agents have linear utility and discount utility at rate b. Agents are either homeowners or renters. To simplify, we assume that each agent can
own only one house. One characteristic that distinguishes houses from
stocks and other assets is that houses cannot be sold short. So, we assume
that there is no short selling in our model.3
For simplicity, we assume that there is a fixed stock of houses, k < 1, in
the economy. This assumption is motivated by the observation that large
booms and busts occur in cities where increases in the supply of houses
are limited by zoning laws, land scarcity, or infrastructure constraints (see,
e.g., Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saks 2005; Quigley and Raphael 2005; Barlevy
and Fisher 2010; Saiz 2010). There is a rental market with 1 2 k houses.
These units are produced by competitive firms at a cost of w per period,
so the rental rate is constant and equal to w. The momentary utilities of
owning and renting a house are εh and εr, respectively. We assume that
3
We use the conventional meaning of the expression “short sale,” which is a transaction
in which an investor borrows an asset and sells it with the promise to return it at a later date.
In the recent crisis, the term short sale has been used with a different meaning. It refers to
a situation in which the house’s sale price falls short of the mortgage value and the bank
agrees to accept the proceeds of the sale in lieu of the mortgage balance.

booms and busts in housing markets

1093

the utility of owning a home is higher than the net utility of renting (εh >
εr 2 w), so that home prices are positive.
We first consider the equilibrium of a version of the economy with no
uncertainty. Agents decide at time t whether they will be renters or homeowners at time t 1 1. The net utility of being a renter at time t 1 1 is εr 2 w.
If an agent buys a house at time t, he pays Pt. At time t 1 1, he lives in the
home and receives a utility flow ε h. The agent can sell the house at the
end of period t 1 1 for a price Pt 11. Since all agents are identical, in equilibrium they must be indifferent between buying and renting a house. So,
house prices satisfy the following equation:
2P t 1 bðP t11 1 ε h Þ 5 bðεr 2 wÞ:

ð1Þ

The stationary solution to this equation is
P5

b
ε;
12b

ð2Þ

where ε 5 εh 2 ðεr 2 wÞ.4
We now consider an experiment that captures the effects of infrequent changes in the value of housing fundamentals. Examples include
low-frequency changes in the growth rate of productivity, which affects
agents’ wealth, and changes in financial regulation or innovations, which
make it easier for agents to purchase homes. For concreteness, we focus
on the utility of owning a home. Suppose that, before time 0, the economy is in a steady state with no uncertainty, so Pt 5 P. At time 0, agents
learn that in each period, with small probability f, the value of ε changes
permanently to a new level, ε*. Agents agree about the value of f but disagree about the probability distribution of ε*. Agents do not receive any
information useful to update their priors about the distribution of ε*.5
As soon as uncertainty is resolved, agents become homogeneous in their
beliefs.
Prior to the resolution of uncertainty, agents fall into three categories
depending on their priors about ε*. We refer to these agents as “optimistic,” “skeptical,” and “vulnerable,” with the fraction of agents of each
type being denoted, respectively, by ot, st, and vt. Agents’ types are publicly
observable, and variables that depend on type are indexed by j 5 o, s, v.
Priors are common knowledge, so higher-order beliefs play no role in our
model. The laws of social dynamics described below are public informa-

4
It is well known that there are explosive solutions to eq. (1) (see, e.g., Diba and Grossman 1987). We abstract from these solutions in our analysis.
5
If agents disagreed about the value of f, they would update their priors about f after observing whether a change in fundamentals occurred. We abstract from uncertainty
about the value of f to focus our analysis on the importance of social dynamics.

1094

journal of political economy

tion. Agents take into account future changes in the fractions of the population that hold different views.
The new value of the flow utility of owning a home, ε*, is drawn from
the set F. For simplicity, we assume that this set contains n elements. An
agent of type j attaches the probability distribution function (pdf) f j(ε*)
to the elements of F.
We assume that, at time 0, there is a very small fraction of skeptical and
optimistic agents. Almost all agents are vulnerable; that is, they have diffuse priors about future fundamentals. Optimistic agents expect an improvement in fundamentals:
E o ðε* Þ > ε:
Skeptical and vulnerable agents do not expect fundamentals to improve:
E s ðε* Þ 5 E v ðε* Þ 5 ε:
For now, we assume that agents do not internalize the possibility of
changing their type as a result of social interactions. This assumption
rules out actions that are optimal only because agents might change their
type in the future. For example, a skeptical agent might buy a home, even
though this action is not optimal given his current priors, because there is
a chance he might become optimistic in the future. We return to this issue at the end of this section.
We use the entropy of the pdf f j(ε*) to measure the uncertainty of an
agent’s views,
n

e j 5 2 o f j ðε*i Þ ln½ f j ðε*i Þ:
i51

The higher is the value of e , the greater is agent j’s uncertainty about ε*.
This uncertainty is maximal when the pdf is uniform, in which case e j 5
ln(n).
Agents meet randomly at the beginning of the period. When agent l
meets agent j, j adopts the prior of l with probability gl j. The value of gl j
depends on the ratio of the entropies of the agents’ pdfs:
j

glj 5 maxð1 2 e l =e j ; 0Þ:

ð3Þ

This equation implies that a low-entropy agent does not adopt the prior
of a high-entropy agent. In addition, it implies that the probability that a
high-entropy agent adopts the priors of the low-entropy agent is decreasing in the ratio of the two entropies. We use this formulation for two reasons. First, it strikes us as plausible. Second, it is consistent with evidence
from the psychology literature that people are more persuaded by those
who are confident (e.g., Sniezek and Van Swol 2001; Price and Stone 2004).

booms and busts in housing markets

1095

Throughout, we assume that the entropy of vulnerable agents exceeds
the entropy of skeptical and optimistic agents:
es < ev;

eo < ev:

So, the vulnerable are the most likely to change their views. In addition,
we make the natural assumption that most agents are vulnerable at time
0 and that the initial number of optimistic and skeptical agents is small
and identical: o 0 5 s 0.
The population dynamics generated by our model are similar to those
implied by the infectious-disease models of Bernoulli (1766) and Kermack
and McKendrick (1927).6 We consider two cases. In the first, the prior of
the skeptical agents has the lowest entropy. In the second, the prior of
the optimistic agents has the lowest entropy. In both cases, if uncertainty
is not resolved, the entire population converges to the view of the agent
with the lowest entropy. The model generates a fad, in the sense that the
fraction of the population with the second-lowest entropy rises and then
falls.
1.

Case 1

In this case, the pdf of the skeptical agents has the lowest entropy:
es < eo < ev:
The fractions of optimistic, skeptical, and vulnerable agents in the population evolve according to
o t11 5 o t 1 gov o t v t 2 gso o t s t ;

ð4Þ

s t11 5 s t 1 gsv s t v t 1 gso o t s t ;

ð5Þ

v t11 5 v t 2 gov o t v t 2 gsv s t v t :

ð6Þ

To understand equation (4), note that there are otvt encounters between optimistic and vulnerable agents.7 As a result of these encounters,
govotvt vulnerable agents become optimistic. Similarly, there are stot encounters between skeptical and optimistic agents. As a result of these
encounters, gsostot optimistic agents become skeptical. These two sets of
encounters and the value of ot determine ot11.

6
Bernoulli (1766) used his model of the spread of smallpox to show that vaccination
would result in a significant increase in life expectancy. When vaccination was introduced,
insurance companies used Bernoulli’s life expectancy calculations to revise the price of annuity contracts (Dietz and Heesterbeek 2002).
7
See Duffie and Sun (2007) for a law of large numbers that applies to pairwise random
meetings.

1096

journal of political economy

Consider next equation (5). There are otst encounters between skeptical and optimistic agents, which lead gsootst optimistic agents to become
skeptical. There are also stvt encounters between skeptical and vulnerable agents, which lead gsvstvt vulnerable agents to become skeptical. Finally, equation (6) implies that the fraction of vulnerable agents declines
over time because govotvt vulnerable agents become optimistic and gsvstvt
become skeptical.
Consider a path of the economy along which uncertainty is not realized. In case 1, the model can generate a fad in which the number of optimistic agents rises for a while before declining toward zero. To see how
this pattern emerges, suppose that initially a large fraction of the population is vulnerable and that gov v 0 > gso s 0 . In conjunction with equation
(4), the latter condition implies that the number of optimistic agents initially rises over time as the number of vulnerable agents who become optimistic is larger than the number of optimistic agents who become skeptical. The number of vulnerable agents declines over time as some of these
agents become optimistic and others become skeptical (see eq. [6]). This
decline implies that, eventually, gov v t < gso s t . At this point, the fraction of
optimistic agents begins to fall. As t → ∞, all optimistic agents become skeptical (see eq. [5]).
2.

Case 2

In this case, the pdf of the optimistic agents has the lowest entropy:
eo < es < ev:
The fractions of optimistic, skeptical, and vulnerable agents in the population evolve according to
o t11 5 o t 1 gov o t v t 1 gos o t s t ;

ð7Þ

s t11 5 s t 1 gsv s t v t 2 gos o t s t ;

ð8Þ

v t11 5 v t 2 gov o t v t 2 gsv s t v t :

ð9Þ

To understand equation (7), note that the otvt encounters between optimistic and vulnerable agents lead govotvt vulnerable agents to become
optimistic. There are also otst encounters between optimistic and skeptical agents, which lead gosot st skeptical agents to become optimistic. Equation (8) reflects the fact that the otst encounters between skeptical and
optimistic agents result in gosot st skeptical agents becoming optimistic.
The stvt encounters between skeptical and vulnerable agents result in gsvstvt
vulnerable agents becoming skeptical. Finally, equation (9) implies that vt
declines, since govotvt vulnerable agents become optimistic and gsvst vt become skeptical.

booms and busts in housing markets

1097

This version of the model also generates a fad, but here, it is the number of skeptical agents that rises for a while before declining toward zero.
A fad arises when initially a large fraction of the population is vulnerable and gsv v t > gos o t . The basic difference between cases 1 and 2 is that
in the latter case skeptics are converted into optimists, so that eventually
all agents become optimistic.
B. Equilibrium in the Frictionless Model
House prices are determined by the marginal buyer. To identify this
buyer, we sort agents in declining order of their house valuations. The
marginal buyer is the agent who is at the kth percentile of house valuations. When the fraction of optimistic agents is lower than k for all t, the
marginal home buyer is always a nonoptimistic agent. Since these agents
do not expect changes in the utility of owning a home, the price is constant
over time at the value given by equation (2). In order to generate a boombust cycle, at least k agents must be optimistic at some point in time.
It is useful to define the time t fundamental value of a house before the
resolution of uncertainty for a given agent, assuming that this agent is
the marginal buyer until uncertainty is resolved. We denote these fundamental values for the optimistic, skeptical, and vulnerable agents by P ot , P vt ,
and P st , respectively. The value of P ot is given by

 

E o ðε* Þ
o
o *
o
1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t 1 1 Þ :
ð10Þ
P t 5 b f E ðε Þ 1 b
12b
The logic that underlies this equation is as follows. With probability f,
uncertainty is resolved. In this case, the expected utility flow and house
price at time t 1 1 are E o(ε*) and bE o ðε* Þ=ð1 2 bÞ, respectively. With
probability 1 2 f, uncertainty is not resolved. In this case, the agent receives a utility flow, ε, and values the house at P ot11 . Since we are deriving
the fundamental value under the assumption that the optimistic agent is
always the marginal home buyer, P ot 5 P ot 11 5 P o . Solving equation (10)
for P o, we obtain
Po 5 b

fE o ðε* Þ=ð1 2 bÞ 1 ð1 2 fÞε
:
1 2 bð1 2 fÞ

ð11Þ

Vulnerable and skeptical agents expect ε* to equal ε, so
Ps 5 Pv 5

b
ε:
12b

ð12Þ

We begin by characterizing the equilibrium of the economy in case 1.
Recall that in this case, the fraction of optimistic agents first rises and
then falls. Suppose that the number of optimistic agents is lower than

1098

journal of political economy

k for t < t1 and exceeds k for t ∈ [t 1, t 2], where t 2 < ∞. For t > t 2, the marginal home buyer is a skeptical agent, so the price is given by
Pt 5 Ps

for t ≥ t 2 1 1:

ð13Þ

Using P t 11 as a terminal value, we can compute recursively the prices for
t ≤ t 2 that obtain if uncertainty is not realized. Since the marginal home
buyer between period t1 and period t 2 is an optimistic agent, we have
2

P t 5 bff½E o ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þg
*
for t1 ≤ t ≤ t 2. Here, Pt11 and P t11
are the t 1 1 prices when uncertainty is
not realized and when uncertainty is realized, respectively.
Since the marginal home buyer for t < t1 is a vulnerable/skeptical agent,
we have

P t 5 bff½E s ðε 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þg
for t < t1. In writing this equation, we use the fact that E s(ε*) 5 E v(ε*).
The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium in case 1.
Proposition 1. The equilibrium price path in case 1 when uncertainty is not realized is given by

(P

Pt 5

s

1 ½ bð1 2 fÞt 2t ðP t 2 P s Þ
1

1

t < t1

P o 2 ½bð1 2 fÞt 112t ðP o 2 P s Þ t 1 ≤ t ≤ t 2

ð14Þ

2

t > t 2:

Ps

The equilibrium price path when uncertainty is realized is given by
Pt 5

b *
ε:
12b

ð15Þ

The intuition for this proposition is as follows. Before time t1 the marginal buyer is a vulnerable agent. If uncertainty is not realized, the marginal buyer at time t1 is an optimistic agent. The latter agent is willing to
buy the house at a value that exceeds P s because he realizes a capital gain,
P t 2 P s , with probability ð1 2 fÞt 2t . The equilibrium price is equal to P s
plus the expected discounted capital gain, which is ½bð1 2 fÞt 2t ðP t 2 P s Þ
(see the first line of eq. [14]). The price jumps at time 0 from P s to P s 1
½bð1 2 fÞt ðP t 2 P s Þ because of the expected capital gain associated with
the change in the marginal buyer at time t 1. As long as uncertainty is not
realized, the price rises before time t 1 because the expected discounted
capital gain increases at the rate b(1 2 f).
Between time t1 and t2 the marginal buyer is an optimistic agent. However, if uncertainty is not realized, the marginal buyer at time t 2 1 1 is a
skeptical agent who is willing to buy the house at a price P s < P o. So, the
1

1

1

1

1

1

booms and busts in housing markets

1099

equilibrium price is equal to P o minus the expected discounted capital
loss, ½bð1 2 fÞt 1 12t ðP o 2 P s Þ (the second line of eq. [14]). As long as uncertainty is not realized, the price falls before t 2 1 1, because the expected discounted capital loss rises at rate b(1 2 f). After time t 2 1 1
there are no more changes in the identity of the marginal buyer. So, unless uncertainty is realized, the price remains constant and equal to the
fundamental value of a house to a skeptical agent, P s. Finally, once uncertainty is realized, agents have homogeneous expectations about fundamentals and the price of a house is given by equation (15).
Proposition 1 implies that the model generates a boom-bust cycle in
house prices as long as uncertainty is not realized. Of course, the model
can also generate a boom-bust as well as a protracted boom depending
on when uncertainty is realized and the realization of ε*.
The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium in case 2. Recall that, in this case, the fraction of the population that is optimistic converges monotonically to one. We define t1 as the first time period in which
there are more optimistic agents than homes (ot ≥ k).
Proposition 2. The equilibrium price path in case 2 when uncertainty is not realized is given by
( s
P 1 ½bð1 2 fÞt 2t ðP o 2 P s Þ t < t 1
ð16Þ
Pt 5
Po
t ≥ t 1:
2

1

The equilibrium price path when uncertainty is realized is given by
Pt 5

b *
ε:
12b

ð17Þ

The intuition for this proposition is as follows. From time t1 until uncertainty is resolved, the marginal home buyer is an optimistic agent. So,
without resolution of uncertainty, the price is equal to P o for all t ≥ t1. Before t1, the marginal home buyer is a vulnerable/skeptical agent who has
a fundamental house value P s. The equilibrium price is equal to P s plus
the discounted expected value of the capital gain that results from selling the house to an optimistic agent at time t1, ½bð1 2 fÞt 2t ðP o 2 P s Þ.
1

C. A Simple Numerical Example
We now consider a simple numerical example that illustrates the properties of the model summarized in the previous proposition.
We choose the normalization ε 5 E v(ε*) 5 E s(ε*) 5 1. Given this
choice, the equilibrium depends on three additional features of agents’
priors about future fundamentals: E o(ε*), e o/e v, and e s/e v. In both cases
1 and 2 we assume that
E o ðε* Þ 5 2:89:

1100

journal of political economy

In case 1 we assume that
e o =e v 5 0:894;

e s =e v 5 0:890:

In case 2 we assume that
e o =e v 5 0:890;

e s =e v 5 0:894:

We think of each time period as representing 1 month and choose b so
that the implied annual discount rate is 6 percent. We assume that there
is a very small number of optimistic and skeptical natural renters at time
0: o 0 5 s 0 5 2:87  1026 . The remainder of the population is vulnerable.
We choose f, the probability that uncertainty is realized in each period,
to equal .0038. Without resolution of uncertainty, this value, together with
our other assumptions, implies that a boom-bust pattern emerges over the
course of roughly 19 years.
1.

Case 1

Our choices for e o/e v and e s/e v imply
gso 5 0:00475;

gov 5 0:106;

and

gsv 5 0:110:

Given these values, equations (5) and (6) imply that the maximum value
of ot is 0.345. So, the presence of optimistic agents affects prices only if
k < 0.345. We assume that k 5 0.275.
Figure 1a shows the evolution of the fraction of skeptical, optimistic,
and vulnerable agents in the absence of resolution of uncertainty about
ε*. Consistent with the intuition above, the fraction of optimistic agents
in the population initially increases slowly. The infection then gathers
momentum until the fraction of optimistic agents peaks at 0.345 in the
middle of year 12. Thereafter, this fraction declines toward zero. Between
t1, the middle of year 11, and t 2, the end of year 19, the optimistic agents
are the marginal buyers since they exceed k 5 0.275 in the population.
The fraction of vulnerable agents falls over time and converges to zero
as these agents become either skeptical or optimistic. The fraction of skeptical agents rises monotonically over time until everybody in the economy
is skeptical.
Consistent with proposition 1, figure 2 shows that the price jumps at
time 0 and then continues to rise slowly until optimistic agents become
the marginal home buyers at time t1. Thereafter, the price drops rapidly,
reverting to its initial steady-state value.
The one-period-ahead rate of return that agent j expects at time t, conditional on uncertainty not having been realized, is given by
r tj 5

f½E j ðε* Þ 1 bE j ðε* Þ=ð1 2 bÞ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ
2 1:
Pt

ð18Þ

booms and busts in housing markets

1101

F IG . 1.—Social dynamics. The graphs show the evolution of the populations of each type
of agent due to social dynamics. In case 1, the priors of skeptical agents have the lowest
entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents have the highest entropy. In case 2, the
priors of optimistic agents have the lowest entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents
have the highest entropy.

Figure 2 displays r jt expressed on an annual basis. The figure also displays
the volume of transactions implied by the model computed under the
assumption that trade occurs only when at least one of the agents has
a motive for transacting.
A key feature of figure 2 is that agents have heterogeneous beliefs about
the expected rate of return to housing. This basic feature of our model
is consistent with the findings of Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), who document this heterogeneity using the Michigan Survey of Consumers.8
The annualized real rate of return to the marginal homeowner is constant and equal to 6 percent. Before t1, the skeptical/vulnerable agents
are the marginal homeowners. Optimistic agents expect very high rates
of return, which reflect the high value of E o(ε*). So all newly optimistic
agents (govotvt) buy homes.9 During this period, prices rise and all trans8
Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) provides evidence of substantial heterogeneity of beliefs regarding the returns to other assets, such as stocks.
9
We assume that the vulnerable agents sell since they are indifferent between holding
and selling. The optimistic agents could induce them to sell by offering an arbitrarily small
premium. Some optimistic agents become skeptical during this time period. However, for

1102

journal of political economy

F IG . 2.—Equilibrium of the frictionless model, case 1. The graphs show a variety of paths
for the frictionless model with social dynamics in case 1, in which the priors of skeptical
agents have the lowest entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents have the highest
entropy. The number of optimistic agents, the price of a house, the monthly expected rate
of return, and transactions volume are all computed under the assumption that uncertainty is not realized. The expected price paths are the expected values of the house price
at each date, as of time 0, given the priors of the different agents.

actions are initiated by agents who buy homes. Prices and transaction
volume peak simultaneously at time t 1.
Between time t 1 and t 2, the marginal buyer is an optimistic agent. During this period, the skeptical/vulnerable agents expect negative rates of
return because they have a low expected value of ε*. So, all newly skeptical agents (gsostot) sell their homes to optimistic agents who are indifferent between buying and holding. During this period, prices fall and all
transactions are initiated by agents who sell homes. Figure 2 displays the
time series of transactions volume. Prices and transactions volume peak
simultaneously at time t1. Transaction volume collapses once prices start
to fall because at this point optimistic agents own all the houses. After
time t1, the number of transactions recovers as some optimistic agents
become skeptical and sell their homes.
t ≤ t1, optimistic agents who become skeptical are indifferent between holding and selling,
so we assume that they do not transact.

booms and busts in housing markets

1103

After time t 2, the marginal homeowner is, once again, a skeptical/vulnerable agent. Optimistic agents expect very high rates of return that are
not reflected in market prices, so all newly optimistic agents (govotvt) buy
homes. But there are so few vulnerable agents that the number of transactions is close to zero.
From figure 2 we see that, while the identity of the marginal homeowner changes over time, the rate of return to the marginal owner is always 6 percent. Since pricing is determined by the marginal owner, the
expectations of inframarginal agents are not reflected in home prices.
Finally, figure 2 displays the price paths expected by optimistic and
skeptical/vulnerable agents at time 0. These paths are given by
E j0 ðP t Þ 5 ð1 2 fÞt11 ðε 1 P t11 Þ 1 ½1 2 ð1 2 fÞt11 
 ½E j ðε* Þ 1 bE j ðε* Þ=ð1 2 bÞ;

ð19Þ

for j 5 o, s, v. Optimistic agents expect prices to rise very rapidly until
time t1. Thereafter, expected prices continue to rise but at a lower rate,
reflecting the fall in actual market prices that occurs if uncertainty is not
realized. This fall is outweighed by the high value of ε* expected by optimistic agents. Finally, expected prices rise at a slightly higher rate after
time t 2, because the price remains constant if uncertainty is not realized.
Consider next the price path expected by skeptical and vulnerable
agents at time 0. Equation (19) implies that
E o0 ðP t Þ 2 E s0 ðP t Þ 5 ½1 2 ð1 2 fÞt11 

E o ðε* Þ 2 E s ðε* Þ
:
12b

ð20Þ

So, the difference between E o0 ðP t Þ and E s0 ðP t Þ reflects agents’ different
expectations about ε*. This difference implies that skeptical/vulnerable
agents always expect a lower price than optimistic agents. The skeptical/
vulnerable agents expect prices to rise between time 0 and time t1 because the price appreciation that occurs, as long as uncertainty is not realized, outweighs the fall in price that occurs if uncertainty is realized.
Between time t1 and t 2, skeptical/vulnerable agents expect prices to fall
whether uncertainty is realized or not. After time t 2, the market price corresponds to the skeptical/vulnerable agent’s fundamental price, so expected prices are constant.
2.

Case 2

As in case 1, we assume that k 5 0.275. Our choices for e o/e v and e s/e v imply
gos 5 0:00475;

gov 5 0:110;

and

gsv 5 0:106:

1104

journal of political economy

Figure 1b shows the evolution of the fraction of skeptical, optimistic, and
vulnerable agents in the absence of resolution of uncertainty about ε*.
The dynamics are the same as in figure 1a, except that the skeptical and
optimistic agents have switched places. Here there is a fad, in the sense
that the number of skeptical agents rises for roughly 12.5 years before
falling to zero. The fraction of optimistic agents rises monotonically over
time until everyone is optimistic.
Consistent with proposition 2, figure 3 shows that the price jumps at
time 0 and then continues to rise until the middle of year 10, when all
homes are owned by optimistic agents. From this moment on, the price
is constant and equal to the optimistic agent’s fundamental value.
Figure 3 also shows the volume of transactions implied by the model.
At time 0, all homes are owned by vulnerable agents. Between time 0 and
time t1, all newly optimistic agents (govotvt) buy homes. At time t1, all the

F IG . 3.—Equilibrium of the frictionless model, case 2. The graphs show a variety of paths
for the frictionless model with social dynamics in case 2, in which the priors of optimistic
agents have the lowest entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents have the highest
entropy. The number of optimistic agents, the price of a house, the monthly expected rate
of return, and transactions volume are all computed under the assumption that uncertainty
is not realized. The expected price paths are the expected values of the house price at each
date, as of time 0, given the priors of the different agents.

booms and busts in housing markets

1105

homes are owned by optimistic agents and there are no new transactions
because optimistic agents do not become skeptical.
Finally, figure 3 displays the price path expected by optimistic and
skeptical/vulnerable agents at time 0. This path is computed using equation (19). Optimistic agents expect prices to rise very rapidly until t1.
From this point on, the expected price continues to increase because
there is a rise over time in the probability that uncertainty is realized
and optimistic agents receive a large capital gain. Figure 3 also displays
the price path expected by skeptical and vulnerable agents at time 0. As
in case 1, the difference between E o0 ðP t Þ and E s0 ðP t Þ is fully accounted for
by different expectations about ε* (see eq. [20]).

D. Interpreting Cross-Sectional Data on House Prices
A well-known property of housing markets is the presence of both boombust episodes and episodes in which booms are not followed by busts. Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) document this property using postwar data.
A longer perspective is provided by Ambrose, Eichholtz, and Lindenthal
(2013), who document this property using four centuries of housing data
for Holland. Eitrheim and Erlandsen (2004) provide analogous evidence
using two centuries of housing data for Norway.
It is useful to briefly quantify some stylized facts about the postwar
episodes. Our results are based on quarterly OECD data on real house
prices for 25 countries for the period 1970–2012. An operational definition of a boom or a bust requires that we define turning points in which
upturns and downturns in house prices begin. To avoid defining highfrequency movements in the data as upturns or downturns, we first smooth
the data. Let yt denote the logarithm of an index of real house prices. Also
let xt denote the centered moving average of yt,
xt 5

n
1
y :
o
2n 1 1 j52n t1j

We define an upturn as an interval of time in which Dxt > 0 for all t and
a downturn as an interval of time in which Dxt < 0. A turning point is
the last time period within an upturn or downturn. A boom is an upturn
for which yT 2 yT2L > z, and a bust is a downturn for which yT 2 yT2L < 2z.
Here, T is the date at which the boom or bust ended, L is the length of
the boom or bust, and z is a positive scalar. The results discussed below
are generated assuming that n 5 5, so that xt is defined as an 11-month
centered moving average of yt. In addition, we assume that z 5 0.15 so that
booms and busts are defined as price moments greater than or equal to

1106

journal of political economy

15 percent. Our findings are not sensitive to small changes in the assumed values of n and z.
Three key features emerge from our analysis. First, every country in
the sample experienced house price booms and busts.10 The median sizes
of booms and busts are 44.7 and 228.5 percent, respectively. Second,
booms and busts occur over protracted periods of time. The median
lengths of booms and busts in our sample are 5.5 and 5.38 years, respectively. Third, in many cases booms are followed by protracted busts. We
identified 62 booms and 38 busts in our sample. Of the 62 booms, 33
were followed within 6 months by a bust. So, roughly half of the booms
turned into a bust, while the other half did not.
Our frictionless model is consistent, at least qualitatively, with these
three features of the data. Regardless of whether we are in case 1 or case
2, optimistic agents expect prices to rise and eventually level off, while
skeptical agents expect prices to rise and then fall. An econometrician
taking repeated samples from our data would see both boom-busts and
booms that are not followed by busts. The boom-bust episodes would typically occur in economies in which the skeptical agents happen to be correct. The booms that are not followed by busts would typically occur in
economies in which the optimistic agents happen to be right. Of course,
in any given economy the econometrician cannot predict which type of
episode he would see because, by construction, the data are not informative about which agent is correct.
E. Robustness
In our analysis we assume that agents do not take into account the possibility of changing their type as a result of social interactions. In Appendix A, we assess the quantitative impact of this assumption by calculating
equilibrium prices when agents do internalize this possibility. We find
that internalizing these changes makes virtually no difference to our results because the probability of switching types is small. In Appendix B,
we discuss a second type of robustness. There, we describe a Bayesian environment that generates social dynamics that are similar to those of our
model.
III. A Matching Model
The frictionless model shows the potential of social dynamics to account
for observed house price dynamics. However, this model has three unattractive features. First, to generate a boom-bust cycle in case 1, the frac10
Australia and Austria experienced only booms, while Germany and Slovenia experienced only busts. The data for Austria and Slovenia are available only since 2000 and
2007, respectively.

booms and busts in housing markets

1107

tion of agents that are optimistic must exceed k percent of the population for at least some period of time. According to the Bureau of the
Census (Housing Vacancy Survey, series H-111 reports), on average, during the period 1965–2011, 65 percent of American households owned
homes. So the model requires that a very large fraction of the population
become optimistic.11 Second, the price rise that occurs at time 0 is large
relative to the peak rise in prices. Third, the model is too stylized to account for the fact that the volume of transactions and time to sell are
highly correlated with average house prices.
To address these shortcomings, we use an extended version of the
matching model proposed by Piazzesi and Schneider (2009). In this section, we consider a version of the model in which agents have homogeneous expectations. The basic structure of this model coincides with that
of the frictionless model described in Section II. The economy is populated by a continuum of agents with unit measure. All agents have linear
utility and discount utility at the rate b. There is a fixed stock of houses,
k < 1, and a rental market with 1 2 k houses. Rental units are produced
by competitive firms at a cost w per period, so the rental rate is constant
and equal to w.
There are four types of agents in the economy: homeowners, unhappy
homeowners, natural home buyers, and natural renters. We denote the
fraction of these agents in the population by ht, ut, bt, and rt, respectively.
Homeowners and unhappy homeowners own homes at time t. All homes
are occupied in equilibrium so that
h t 1 u t 5 k:

ð21Þ

Both natural buyers and natural renters rent homes at time t so that
b t 1 r t 5 1 2 k:

ð22Þ

We describe the state of the economy by zt 5 (ht, bt)0 . We now discuss the
problems faced by the different agents in the economy.
A.

Homeowners

A homeowner derives momentary utility ε from his home. The agent’s
value function, H(zt), is given by
H ðz t Þ 5 ε 1 b½ð1 2 hÞH ðzt11 Þ 1 hU ðz t11 Þ:

ð23Þ

11
An alternative strategy for remedying this shortcoming is to allow for heterogeneity in
the utility of owning a home. For example, suppose that there is a group of agents who
would never sell their home because they derive such a high utility from it. The presence
of this group is equivalent to a reduction in k, so that it is easier to generate a boom in the
price of homes that are potentially for sale.

1108

journal of political economy

With probability h, a homeowner’s match with his home goes sour and
he becomes an unhappy homeowner. We denote the value function of
an unhappy homeowner by U(z t).
B. Unhappy Homeowners
We normalize the momentary utility that an unhappy homeowner derives from his home to zero. This agent decides whether or not to put
his home up for sale. To simplify, we abstract from the transactions costs
of selling a home. When a house is up for sale, it sells with probability
q s(zt). Once the sale occurs, the unhappy homeowner becomes a natural
renter. The value function of an unhappy homeowner is given by
U ðz t Þ 5 max½U sell ðz t Þ; U stay ðz t Þ:

ð24Þ

The value function of an unhappy homeowner who puts his house up for
sale is
U sell ðz t Þ 5 q s ðz t ÞfP ðz t Þ 1 b½ð1 2 λÞRðz t11 Þ 1 λBðz t11 Þg
1 ½1 2 q s ðzt ÞbU ðzt11 Þ:

ð25Þ

Here, P(zt) denotes the price that an unhappy homeowner expects to receive, conditional on a sale, R(zt) denotes the value function of a natural
renter, and B(zt) denotes the value function of a natural home buyer. The
utility of a natural home buyer appears in equation (25) because any
agent who is a natural renter at the beginning of time t 1 1 is, with probability λ, subject to a preference shock that turns him into a natural buyer.
The value function of an unhappy homeowner who decides not to put
his house up for sale is
U stay ðz t Þ 5 bU ðz t11 Þ 2 wðzt Þ:

ð26Þ

Here w(zt) denotes a nonpecuniary or regret cost paid by unhappy homeowners who do not put their house up for sale. We find that our algorithm
for solving the model is much more stable if we scale the nonpecuniary
cost by the expected revenue from selling the house wðz t Þ 5 wq s ðz t ÞP ðzt Þ.
In addition, this scale factor leads to a particularly simple expression for
the reservation price of an unhappy homeowner:
u

P ðz t Þ 5

b
fU ðzt11 Þ 2 ½ð1 2 λÞRðz t11 Þ 1 λBðz t11 Þg:
11w

ð27Þ

This reservation price makes the unhappy homeowner indifferent between putting the house on the market and not trying to sell it. As w goes
to infinity, the reservation price becomes exogenous.

booms and busts in housing markets

1109

C. Natural Home Buyers
A natural buyer is a renter at time t. He has to choose between renting at
t 1 1 and trying to buy a home. His net flow utility from renting is given
by ε 2 w and his value function is B(zt). If he decides to continue renting,
his value function, B rent(zt), is given by
B rent ðz t Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 bBðz t11 Þ:

ð28Þ

If he tries to buy a house, he succeeds with probability q b(zt). In this case,
he pays a price P b(zt) and his continuation utility is that of a homeowner:
ð1 2 hÞH ðzt11 Þ 1 hU ðz t11 Þ. With probability 1 2 q b ðzt Þ, he does not succeed in buying a house and he remains a renter at time t 1 1. So the value
function of being a potential buyer, B buy(zt), is given by
B buy ðzt Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 q b ðz t Þf2P b ðz t Þ 1 b½ð1 2 hÞH ðz t11 Þ
1 hU ðz t11 Þg 1 ½1 2 q b ðz t ÞbBðz t11 Þ:

ð29Þ

The value function of a natural home buyer is given by
Bðz t Þ 5 max½B rent ðzt Þ; B buy ðzt Þ:

ð30Þ

b

The reservation price, P ðz t Þ, is the price that makes a natural buyer indifferent between buying and renting:
b

P ðz t Þ 5 b½ð1 2 hÞH ðzt11 Þ 1 hU ðz t11 Þ 2 Bðz t11 Þ:

ð31Þ

D. Natural Renters
A natural renter is a renter at time t. His net flow utility from renting
is given by ε 2 w and his value function is R(zt). The only difference between natural renters and natural buyers is that the former derive lower
utility from owning a home. We model this difference by assuming that
whenever natural renters buy a house they pay a fixed cost, kε. This fixed
cost represents the expected present value of the difference between
their utility from owning a home and the corresponding utility of a natural buyer.12 We choose the value of k so that it is not optimal for natural
renters to buy a house in the steady state.
In each period, a fraction λ of natural renters receive a preference shock
and become natural home buyers. A natural renter can choose whether
to continue renting or to try to buy a house. If he continues renting, his
value function, R rent(zt), is given by
12
Since the fixed cost is paid up-front, all homeowners are identical. It does not matter
whether they used to be a natural buyer or a natural renter. This property simplifies our
analysis by reducing the number of different agents in the economy.

1110

journal of political economy
R rent ðz t Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 b½ð1 2 λÞRðz t11 Þ 1 λBðzt11 Þ:

ð32Þ

The continuation utility reflects the fact that a natural renter becomes
a natural home buyer with probability λ.
If the natural renter tries to buy a house, he succeeds with probability
q b(zt). In this case, he pays a price P r(zt) and his continuation utility is the
same as that of a homeowner, (1 2 h)H(zt11) 1 hU(z t11), except that he
must pay the fixed cost kε. With probability 1 2 q b(zt) the natural renter
does not succeed in buying a house. In this case, he continues to be a
renter at time t 1 1. The value function of a natural renter who decides
to buy a house, R buy(zt ), is given by
R buy ðzt Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 q b ðzt Þf2P r ðzt Þ 2 kε 1 b½ð1 2 hÞH ðz t11 Þ
1 hU ðz t11 Þg 1 ½1 2 q b ðz t Þb½ð1 2 λÞRðz t11 Þ 1 λBðz t11 Þ:

ð33Þ

The value function of a natural renter is given by
Rðz t Þ 5 max½R rent ðz t Þ; R buy ðz t Þ:

ð34Þ

r

The reservation price, P ðz t Þ, is the price that makes natural renters indifferent between buying and renting:
r

P ðz t Þ 5 bf½ð1 2 hÞH ðzt11 Þ 1 hU ðz t11 Þ
2 ½ð1 2 λÞRðz t11 Þ 1 λBðz t11 Þg 2 kε:

ð35Þ

It is useful to define a set of indicator functions summarizing the optimal strategy of different types of agents. The indicator function J b(zt) is
equal to one if it is optimal for a natural buyer to buy a house when the
state of the economy is zt and is equal to zero otherwise. The indicator
function J r(zt) is equal to one if it is optimal for a natural renter to buy
a house when the state of the economy is zt and is equal to zero otherwise. The indicator function J u(zt) is equal to one if it is optimal for an
unhappy homeowner to put his house up for sale when the state of the
economy is zt and is equal to zero otherwise.
E. Timing
The timing of events within a period is as follows. At the beginning of the
period, the state variable is zt. Then, preference shocks occur. With probability h, homeowners become unhappy homeowners. With probability
λ, natural renters become natural buyers. Then agents make decisions.13
13

Given our notation, value functions are evaluated at this point in time.

booms and busts in housing markets

1111

Transactions occur at the end of the period. A fraction q s ðzt ÞJ u ðz t Þ of unhappy homeowners sell their homes while a fraction q b ðzt ÞJ b ðz t Þ of home
buyers buy houses.
The laws of motion for the fraction of homeowners, unhappy homeowners, natural home buyers, and natural renters in the population
are given by
h t11 5 ð1 2 hÞh t 1 q b ðzt Þ½ðb t 1 λr t ÞJ b ðz t Þ 1 r t ð1 2 λÞ J r ðz t Þ;

ð36Þ

u t11 5 ðu t 1 hh t Þ½1 2 q s ðz t ÞJ u ðz t Þ;

ð37Þ

b t11 5 ðb t 1 λr t Þ½1 2 q b ðz t ÞJ b ðz t Þ;

ð38Þ

r t11 5 ð1 2 λÞr t ½1 2 q b ðzt ÞJ r ðz t Þ 1 q s ðz t ÞJ u ðzt Þðu t 1 hh t Þ:

ð39Þ

These equations along with equations (21) and (22) define a law of motion for the state vector, zt, which we denote z t11 5 Gðz t Þ.
F. The Matching Technology
Since agents can own only one home, only natural renters and natural
buyers can potentially buy homes. The total number of potential buyers
is given by
ð40Þ
Buyersðz t Þ 5 ðb t 1 λr t ÞJ b ðzt Þ 1 r t ð1 2 λÞJ r ðzt Þ:
There is no short selling, and homeowners sell only when the match with
their home goes sour. The total number of potential sellers is given by
Sellersðz t Þ 5 ðu t 1 hh t Þ J u ðz t Þ:

ð41Þ

There is a technology that governs matches between buyers and sellers. When a match occurs, the transactions price is determined by generalized Nash bargaining. The bargaining power of sellers and buyers is v
and 1 2 v, respectively. Matches can occur between a seller and a natural
buyer or a natural renter. In the first case, the price paid by the natural
buyer, P b(zt), is
b

u

P b ðzt Þ 5 vP ðz t Þ 1 ð1 2 vÞP ðzt Þ:

ð42Þ

In the second case, the price paid by the natural renter, P r(zt), is
r

u

P r ðzt Þ 5 vP ðz t Þ 1 ð1 2 vÞP ðz t Þ:

ð43Þ

The average price received by an unhappy homeowner, P(zt), is given by
P ðzt Þ 5

ðb t 1 λr t Þ J b ðz t ÞP b ðzt Þ 1 r t ð1 2 λÞ J r ðz t ÞP r ðz t Þ
:
ðb t 1 λr t Þ J b ðz t Þ 1 r t ð1 2 λÞJ r ðzt Þ

ð44Þ

1112

journal of political economy

The number of homes sold, m(zt), is determined by the matching function
mðzt Þ 5 mSellersðz t Þa Buyersðz t Þ12a :
ð45Þ
The probabilities of selling, q s(zt), and buying, q b(zt), a house are given by
q s ðz t Þ 5 mðzt Þ=Sellersðzt Þ;

ð46Þ

q b ðz t Þ 5 mðz t Þ=Buyersðz t Þ:

ð47Þ

G. Solution Algorithm
In this subsection we discuss our algorithm for solving the model. We begin by describing the steady state and then show how to solve the equilibrium of the model, given arbitrary initial conditions.
1.

Steady State

It can be shown that the model economy has a unique steady state in
which the fraction of the different types of agents is constant. We now
solve for the steady-state values of the probabilities of buying and selling
a home (q b and q s) and the fraction of the different agents in the population (h, u, b, and r).
We choose a value for h so that the probabilities of buying and selling
a house coincide in the steady state:
qs 5 qb:
Equations (45) and (46) imply that q s 5 q b 5 m. This property, together
with equations (22) and (38), implies that the steady-state number of natural buyers is given by
b5

ð1 2 mÞλð1 2 kÞ
:
m 1 λð1 2 mÞ

Given b, we solve for r, u, and h as functions of m, λ, and k using equations
(22), (37), and (21).
The fact that q s 5 q b implies that the number of buyers is equal to the
number of sellers (eqq. [46] and [47]). Since there are u 1 hh unhappy
homeowners and b 1 λr buyers in the steady state, we set h so that
u 1 hh 5 b 1 λr :
Given the values of q s and q b, we can solve for the steady-state values of
the prices, P, P b, and P r; the reservation prices of unhappy homeowners,
natural renters, and sellers, P u , P r , and P s ; and the value functions of the

booms and busts in housing markets

1113

different agents evaluated in the steady state: H, U, B, and R. To do so, we
use the steady-state versions of equations (23)–(35), (42)–(44), and the
fact that, in the steady state, B 5 B buy and R 5 R rent.
2.

Transitional Dynamics

We assume that at time T 5 2000 the system has converged to the steady
state. Consequently, we obtain an approximate solution because it takes
an infinite number of periods for the model economy to converge to the
steady state.
Let the set Z denote all the values of the state variable zt that occur
along the transition path. First, guess that J b ðz t Þ 5 J u ðz t Þ 5 1 and J r(zt) 5
0 for all zt ∈ Z. Second, using the initial conditions z 0 5 ðh 0 ; b 0 Þ and equations (36)–(39), compute the sequence of values of ht, ut, bt, and rt. Third,
use equations (40), (41), and (45)–(47) to compute the values of q s(zt)
and q b(zt) for z t ∈ Z. Fourth, assume that H(zT) 5 H, U(zT) 5 U, B(zT) 5
B, and R(zT) 5 R. Then use equations (23)–(35) and (44) to solve backward for {H(zt), U(zt), B(zt), R(zt), P(zt)} for t 5 1 to T. Finally, verify
whether the guesses for J b(zt), J r(zt), and J u(zt) for zt ∈ Z describe the optimal behavior of buyers and sellers along the proposed transition path.
If not, revise the guesses for J b(zt), J r(zt), and J u(zt) until a consistent solution is obtained.
H. Experiments
We illustrate the properties of the model through a series of experiments.
1.

An Expected Improvement in Fundamentals

We first consider the same experiment that we study in the frictionless
model assuming that agents have homogeneous beliefs. At time 0, agents
suddenly anticipate that, with probability f, the utility of owning a home
rises from ε to ε* > ε. It is easy to show that there are no transition dynamics and the economy converges immediately to a new steady state with
a higher price. So, when beliefs are homogeneous, anticipated future
changes in fundamentals are immediately reflected in today’s price. Matching frictions per se do not produce interesting price dynamics, at least in
the experiment studied here.
2.

Transitional Dynamics

We now study an experiment that highlights how an exogenous increase
in the number of buyers affects home prices. The resulting intuition is
useful for understanding the effects of social dynamics that we discuss

1114

journal of political economy

in the next section. Suppose that the fraction of natural buyers in the
population is initially higher than its steady-state value, b 0 > b. Since r 0 5
1 2 k 2 b0, the fraction of natural renters in the population is initially
lower than its steady-state value. The time 0 value of the state variable
is z 0 5 (b0, h 0), where h0 is equal to the steady-state value of h. Equations
(45)–(47) imply that the probability of buying a house at time 0 is lower
than in the steady state: q b ðz0 Þ < q b ðzÞ. The time 0 probability of selling
is higher than it is in the steady state: q s ðz 0 Þ > q s ðzÞ.
We illustrate the transition dynamics of the model using the parameter values summarized in table 1. These values are discussed in detail in
Section IV, where we consider the quantitative properties of our model.
Figure 4 depicts the model’s transition dynamics assuming that the
time 0 number of natural buyers is roughly double its steady-state level.
We now discuss the intuition for why the price is initially high and converges to the steady state from above. Along the transition path, only natural buyers want to buy houses, so the transactions price is a weighted

TABLE 1
Parameter Values, Matching Model
Parameter
Parameters calibrated using the steadystate properties of the model:
k

Value

Description

.65

Fraction of homeowners in
population
Discount factor
Utility of owning a home
Utility of renting, natural
buyer and renter
Rental rate
Parameter of matching function
Parameter of matching function
Preference shock, natural renters
Preference shock, homeowners
Fixed cost of buying, natural
renters
Bargaining power of home buyer

b
ε
ε

.995
1
1

w
a
m
λ
h
k

1
.50
.163
.011
.0058
62

v
Parameters calibrated to survey data:
E o(ε*)
f

.50
2.89
.0038

w

.358

e s/e v

.890

e o/e v

.894

z

2.87  1026

Mean of optimists’ prior
Monthly probability that
uncertainty is realized
Opportunity cost, unhappy
homeowner
Relative entropies of skeptical
and vulnerable agents’ priors
Relative entropies of optimistic
and vulnerable agents’ priors
Initial number of skeptical and
optimistic agents

booms and busts in housing markets

1115

F IG . 4.—Transitional dynamics in a matching model. The figures illustrate the transition
dynamics associated with the matching model, when there is an initial increase in the number of natural home buyers. a, Utility levels of the different agents. The utility levels of the
four types of agents are indicated. b, Prices, buyers, sellers, and transaction probabilities.
Buyers indicates the number of agents who try to buy a home, while sellers indicates the
number of agents who try to sell a home. Price is the average price at which homes are sold.
Buyers’ reservation price is the reservation price of a natural home buyer. c, Agent populations, transactions volume, and transaction probabilities. The four plots on the left show
the number of agents of each type across the transition path. Sales indicates the number of
transactions.

average of the reservation prices of the natural buyers and the unhappy
homeowners:
b

u

P ðz t Þ 5 vP ðz t Þ 1 ð1 2 vÞP ðz t Þ:
u

ð48Þ
u

Consider first the determinants of P ðz t Þ. From equation (27), P ðzt Þ
is increasing in U(zt11) and decreasing in B(zt11) and R(zt11). The utility
of an unhappy homeowner, U(zt11), converges to the steady state from
above, a result that reflects two forces. First, because the number of buyers is high during the transition, the probability of selling is higher than
in the steady state. Second, the price received by the seller is higher than
in the steady state. Next, consider the determinants of R(zt11). Along the
transition path, it is optimal for natural renters to rent. But, with probability λ, they may become natural buyers. Equation (32) implies that

FIG. 4 (Continued )

booms and busts in housing markets

1117

R(zt11) is an increasing function of the discounted expected present value
of B(z t12). Since B(z t11) is low when there is a large number of buyers, so
is R(z t11). Given that U(z t11) is high and B(z t11) and R(z t11) are low relative to the steady state, the reservation price of an unhappy homeowner,
u
P ðzt Þ, is high.
b
Consider second the determinants of P ðzt Þ. When a new buyer moves
into a home, with probability h he becomes immediately disenchanted
and puts the home up for sale. So the reservation price of a natural buyer
is an increasing function of H(zt11) and U(zt11) (see eq. [31]). Since the
opportunity cost to a natural buyer of being a homeowner is B(zt11), his
reservation price is a decreasing function of B(zt11). When the number
of buyers is high relative to the steady state, unhappy homeowners can
sell their home more quickly and receive a higher price. This property has three implications. First, the value of being an unhappy owner,
U(z t11), is higher than in the steady state. Second, H(z t11) is also higher
than in the steady state. This result reflects that all homeowners will eventually become disenchanted and sell their homes. Equation (23) implies
that H(z t11) is an increasing function of the discounted expected present
value of U(z t12), which is high when the number of buyers is unusually
high. Third, given our calibration, the value of being a natural buyer,
B(z t11), falls, reflecting the difficulty in buying a house when there are
b
many buyers. All three forces lead to a rise in P ðzt Þ.
Recall that P(zt) is a weighted average of the reservation prices of the
unhappy homeowners and the natural buyers (see eq. [48]). Since both
of these prices rise, so too does P(zt).
In summary, in this experiment an increase in the initial number of
buyers reduces the probability of buying a house and raises the probability of selling a house. In addition, it lowers the utility of buyers, raises the
utility of sellers, and generates prices that are above their steady-state values.
These results suggest that a boom-bust episode occurs if, for some reason, there is a persistent increase in the number of buyers followed by a
persistent decrease. In the next section we show that social dynamics can
generate the required movements in the number of buyers without observable movements in fundamentals.
IV.

A Matching Model with Social Dynamics

In this section we consider an economy that incorporates the social dynamics described in Section II into the model with matching frictions
described in Section III. We use this model to study the same basic experiment considered in Section II. Suppose that before time 0 the economy
is in a steady state with no uncertainty. At time 0, agents learn that, with a
small probability f, the value of ε changes permanently to a new level ε*.
Agents agree about the value of f but disagree about the probability dis-

1118

journal of political economy

tribution for ε*. Agents do not receive any information that is useful for
updating their priors about the distribution of ε*. Once uncertainty is
resolved, agents become homogeneous in their beliefs. At that point,
the economy coincides with the one studied in the previous section in
which the utility of owning a home is ε*. The economy then converges
to a steady state from initial conditions that are determined by social dynamics and the timing of the resolution of uncertainty.
Agents’ expectations about ε* depend on whether they are optimistic,
skeptical, or vulnerable. In addition, agents can be homeowners, unhappy homeowners, natural buyers, or natural renters. So there are 12
different types of agents in the economy. We use the variables h jt , u jt , b jt ,
and r jt to denote the fraction of the population of type j agents who are
homeowners, unhappy homeowners, natural home buyers, and natural
renters, respectively. The index j denotes whether the agent is optimistic,
skeptical, or vulnerable: j ∈ {o, s, v}.
As in Section III, agents are subject to preference shocks that can turn
natural renters into natural buyers and homeowners into unhappy homeowners. The timing of events within a period is as follows. First, uncertainty
about ε* is realized or not. Second, preference shocks occur. With probability h, homeowners become unhappy homeowners. With probability λ,
natural renters become natural buyers. Third, social interactions occur
and agents potentially change their views. Fourth, transactions occur.
A.

Setting Up the Model

1.

Population Dynamics

There are three ways to incorporate social dynamics into the matching
model. The first is closest in spirit to Section III. Here, agents meet in
the beginning of the period via random matching, at which point social
dynamics occur. With this timing, social dynamics affect directly the number of buyers and sellers in the housing market by changing the fraction
of agents of different types. The second approach assumes that social interactions occur only when agents transact in the housing market. Under
this assumption, transactions drive social dynamics, which later on drive
further transactions. The third approach assumes that social dynamics occur at the beginning of the period as well as during market transactions.
We choose the first rather than the second approach because it highlights the role of social dynamics in generating transactions. We choose
the first rather than the third approach because it is much simpler and
it provides a parsimonious way of generating a gradual increase in the
number of optimistic agents (see Sec. II).
To solve the model, we must keep track of the fraction of the different
types of agents in the model. Prior to the resolution of uncertainty the
number of homeowners adds up to k and the number of renters to

booms and busts in housing markets

1119

1 2 k, so we can summarize the state of the economy using a vector of
10 state variables:
zt 5 ðh t ; b t ; h vt ; h st ; b vt ; b st ; r vt ; r st ; u vt ; u st Þ0 :
To streamline our exposition, we discuss here only the law of motion
for the fraction of natural renters who are vulnerable. In Appendix C
we describe the population dynamics for the other agents, which are similar. We denote the fraction of vulnerable natural renters at the beginning of the period, after preference shocks occur, after social interactions occur, and after purchases and sales occur, by r vt , ðr vt Þ0 , ðr vt Þ00 , and
r vt11 , respectively. At the beginning of the period, a fraction λ of the natural renters become natural buyers,
ðr vt Þ0 5 r vt ð1 2 λÞ:
Next, social interactions occur. A fraction gsvst of the vulnerable natural renters become skeptical and a fraction govot become optimistic. Consequently, the fraction of vulnerable natural renters after social interactions is given by
ðr vt Þ00 5 ðr vt Þ0 2 gsv ðr vt Þ0 s t 2 gov ðr vt Þ0 o t :
Transactions occur at the end of the period. Let ðu vt Þ00 denote the fraction of the vulnerable natural sellers that remain after social interactions
occur. Let J u;v ðzt Þ denote an indicator function that is equal to one if it is
optimal for a vulnerable unhappy homeowner to put his house up for
sale when the state of the economy at the beginning of the period was
zt and zero otherwise. If these agents put their homes up for sale, a fracin selling. So, the total number of successful sellers is
tion qs ðzt Þ succeeds
v 00
qs ðzt ÞJ u;v ðzt Þðu t Þ . These sellers become natural renters. Let J r ;v ðzt Þ denote an indicator function that is equal to one if it is optimal for a vulnerable natural renter to buy a home when the state of the economy
is zt and zero otherwise. The number of vulnerable natural renters who
00
try to purchase a home is equal to J r ;v ðzt Þðr vt Þ . A fraction qb ðzt Þ of these
agents succeed and become natural homeowners. So the number of vulnerable natural renters at the beginning of time t 1 1 is given by
r vt11 5 ðr vt Þ00 2 qb ðzt ÞJ r ;v ðzt Þðr vt Þ00 1 qs ðzt ÞJ u;v ðzt Þðu vt Þ00 :
Using a similar approach for the other population fractions, we can describe the law of motion of zt as zt11 5 Gðzt Þ, where G is a function determined by the deterministic dynamics of the populations of different
types.
After uncertainty is realized, of course, agents have homogeneous beliefs and population dynamics are described by the same processes given
in Section III.

1120

journal of political economy

We now describe the value functions of the different agents in the
economy. We begin by displaying the value functions that are relevant
after ε* is realized. We then discuss the value functions that are relevant
before ε* is realized.
2.

Value Functions and Price Functions after
Realization of Uncertainty

The value functions of the different agents and all the price functions
are the same as those defined in Section III with one difference. The momentary utility, ε, is replaced in value by ε* when uncertainty is realized.
Here, it is useful to explicitly index the value functions H, U, B, and R
u
b
r
and the price functions P, P b, P r, P , P , and P by ε*. For example, we
define the value function of the homeowner as
H ðz t ; ε* Þ 5 ε* 1 b½ð1 2 hÞH ðz t11 ; ε* Þ 1 hU ðz t11 ; ε* Þ:
Similarly, the equations we used in Section III to define U, B, and R and
u
b
r
the price functions P, P b, P r, P , P , and P need to be modified only by
replacing ε with ε*. These functions apply after the resolution of uncertainty because, once uncertainty is resolved, there is no distinction between skeptical, optimistic, and vulnerable agents.
3.

Value Functions before the Realization of Uncertainty

We can write zt 5 Lzt , where L 5 ðI 2 028 Þ. In order to solve the model,
we need to compute value and price functions for the period before uncertainty is realized. Let Hj ðzt Þ, U j ðzt Þ, Bj ðzt Þ, and Rj ðzt Þ denote the
value functions before uncertainty is realized of a type j homeowner,
unhappy homeowner, natural buyer, and natural renter, respectively.
Also define type j ’s time t expectation of a generic value function at time
t 1 1:
V je ðzt Þ ; ð1 2 fÞV j ½Gðzt Þ 1 f o f j ðε* ÞV ½LGðzt Þ; ε* :
ε* ∈F

ð49Þ

Here V represents H, U, B, or R; V represents, correspondingly, H, U, B,
or R; Gðzt Þ is the vector of end-of-period t populations; and LGðzt Þ represents the relevant subset of these variables if uncertainty is resolved at the
beginning of period t 1 1.
Given this notation, prior to the resolution of uncertainty the Bellman
equation for a homeowner is
Hj ðzt Þ 5 ε 1 b½ð1 2 hÞHje ðzt Þ 1 hU je ðzt Þ:

ð50Þ

booms and busts in housing markets

1121

The Bellman equation for a type j unhappy homeowner is
U j ðzt Þ 5 max½U sell;j ðzt Þ; U stay;j ðzt Þ;
with
U sell;j ðzt Þ 5 qs ðzt ÞfP j ðzt Þ 1 b½ð1 2 λÞHje ðzt Þ 1 λBej ðzt Þg
1 ½1 2 qs ðzt ÞbU je ðzt Þ;
U stay;j ðzt Þ 5 bU je ðzt Þ 2 wqs ðzt ÞP j ðzt Þ:
Here P j ðzt Þ denotes the average selling price for type j conditional on a
sale, and qs ðzt Þ is the probability of a sale. The reservation price of a type j
unhappy homeowner is
 u;j ðzt Þ 5
P

b
fU j ðz Þ 2 ½ð1 2 λÞHje ðzt Þ 1 λBej ðzt Þg:
11w e t

The Bellman equation for a type j natural buyer, B j ðzt Þ, is given by
B j ðzt Þ 5 max½Brent;j ðzt Þ; Bbuy;j ðzt Þ;
with
Brent; j ðzt Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 bBej ðzt Þ;
Bbuy; j ðzt Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 qb ðzt Þf2P b;j ðzt Þ 1 b½ð1 2 hÞHje ðzt Þ

ð51Þ

1 hU je ðzt Þg 1 ½1 2 qb ðzt ÞbBej ðzt Þ:
Here P b; j ðzt Þ denotes the average buying price for a type j natural buyer,
and qb ðzt Þ is the probability of a purchase. The reservation price of a type
j natural buyer is
 b;j ðzt Þ 5 b½ð1 2 hÞHj ðzt Þ 1 hU j ðzt Þ 2 B j ðzt Þ:
P
e
e
e

ð52Þ

The Bellman equation for a type j natural renter, B j ðzt Þ, is given by
R j ðzt Þ 5 max½Rrent;j ðzt Þ; Rbuy;j ðzt Þ;
with
Rrent; j ðzt Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 b½ð1 2 λÞRje ðzt Þ 1 λBej ðzt Þ;
Rbuy;j ðzt Þ 5 ε 2 w 1 qb ðzt Þf2P r ;j ðzt Þ 2 kε 1 b½ð1 2 hÞHje ðzt Þ

ð53Þ

1 hU je ðzt Þg 1 ½1 2 qb ðzt Þb½ð1 2 λÞRje ðzt Þ 1 λBej ðzt Þ:
Here P r ;j ðzt Þ denotes the average buying price for a type j natural renter.
The reservation price of a type j natural renter is

1122

journal of political economy
r ;j

P ðzt Þ 5 b½ð1 2 hÞHje ðzt Þ 1 hU je ðzt Þ 2 ð1 2 λÞRej ðzt Þ
2 λBje ðzt Þ 2 kε:
4.

ð54Þ

Buyers and Sellers

In a slight abuse of notation (since the state variable is now zt ), the number of buyers and sellers is given by
Buyersðzt Þ 5

o

00

ðb jt Þ J b;j ðzt Þ 1

j5o;s;v

Sellersðzt Þ 5

o

00

ðr jt Þ J r ;j ðzt Þ;

ð55Þ

j5o;s;v

o ðu Þ J
j5o;s;v

j 00 u;j
t

ðzt Þ:

ð56Þ

Here J b; j ðzt Þ ( J r ; j ðzt Þ) is an indicator function that is equal to one if it
is optimal for a type j natural buyer (renter) to buy a home when the
state of the economy is zt and zero otherwise. Similarly, J u; j ðzt Þ is an indicator function that is equal to one if it is optimal for a type j unhappy
homeowner to put his house up for sale when the state of the economy
is zt and zero otherwise.
The number of homes sold and the probabilities of buying and selling
are given by suitably modified versions of equations (45), (46), and (47).
5.

Transactions Prices

There are 18 different possible transaction prices arising out of potential
transactions between three types of sellers, three types of natural buyers,
and three types of natural renters. The average price paid by a type j natural buyer is
b;j

P b;j ðzt Þ 5 vP ðzt Þ 1 ð1 2 vÞ

o
ℓ 5o;s;v

ðu ℓt Þ00 J u;ℓ ðzt Þ u;ℓ
P ðzt Þ:
Sellersðzt Þ

ð57Þ

The average price paid by a type j natural renter is
r ;j

P r ;j ðzt Þ 5 vP ðzt Þ 1 ð1 2 vÞ

ðu ℓt Þ00 J u;ℓ ðzt Þ u;ℓ
P ðzt Þ:
o
ℓ 5o;s;v Sellersðzt Þ

ð58Þ

The average price received by a type j seller is given by
P j ðzt Þ 5 v

o

ℓ 5o;s;v

 ðzt Þ
½ðb ℓt Þ J b;ℓ ðzt ÞP ðzt Þ 1 ðr ℓt Þ00 J r ;ℓ ðzt ÞP
00

b;ℓ

Buyersðzt Þ
u; j

1 ð1 2 vÞP ðzt Þ:

r ;ℓ

ð59Þ

booms and busts in housing markets

1123

The average price across all transactions can be obtained by averaging
across the seller types:
Pðzt Þ 5

ðu ℓt Þ00 J u;ℓ ðzt Þ ℓ
P ðzt Þ:
o
ℓ 5o;s;v Sellersðzt Þ

ð60Þ

B. Solving the Model
In this subsection, we describe a solution algorithm to compute the equilibrium of the economy along a path on which uncertainty has not been
realized.
We begin by considering case 1. In this case, without resolution of uncertainty, all agents eventually become skeptical. Since E s(ε*) 5 ε, if the
path under consideration converges, then it converges to the initial
steady state of the economy.
We use the algorithm described in Section III to solve for the steady
state associated with all possible realizations of ε* and for the values of
the value functions along the transition to the steady state for any initial
condition zt and realized value of ε*: H(zt, ε*), U(zt, ε*), B(zt, ε*), and R(zt,
ε*). As in Section III, we denote by Z the set of the values of the state variable zt that occur along the equilibrium path. We denote by Z the set of
the values of the state variable zt that occur along the equilibrium path.
Our solution algorithm is as follows. First, we specify the initial conditions in the economy: h j0 , u j0 , b j0 , and r j0 for j 5 o, s, v. We choose these
conditions so that the fractions of homeowners, unhappy homeowners,
natural buyers, and natural renters are equal to their initial steady-state
values. In addition, we assume that all agents are vulnerable except for a
small number, z, of optimistic and skeptical renters: h v0 5 h, b v0 5 b, u v0 5 u,
r o0 5 r s0 5 z, and r v0 5 1 2 k 2 b 2 2z.
Second, we guess values of the indicator functions that summarize the
optimal decisions of natural buyers, natural renters, and unhappy homeowners J b; j ðzt Þ, J r ; j ðzt Þ, and J u; j ðzt Þ for all zt ∈ Z.
Third, we use equations (C1)–(C20) in Appendix C to compute the
path of zt and the analogues of equations (45)–(47) as well as equations
(55) and (56) to compute the values of qs ðzt Þ and qb ðzt Þ for zt ∈ Z.
Fourth, we compute the limiting values of the value functions of all
agents along the path on which uncertainty is not realized. The system of
equations that defines these limiting values is given by equations (C22)–
(C34) in Appendix C.
Fifth, we solve backward for all the value functions using equations
(50)–(54) and (57)–(60). As in Section III, we assume that the economy
has reached its steady state at time T 5 2000.
Sixth, we verify that the initial guesses for the indicator functions
J b; j ðzt Þ, J r ; j ðzt Þ, and J u; j ðzt Þ describe the optimal behavior of buyers

1124

journal of political economy

and sellers along the proposed equilibrium path. If not, we revise the
guesses until we obtain a consistent solution. In all the results that we
report, the equilibrium values of the indicator functions are J b;j ðzt Þ 5
1 and J u; j ðzt Þ 5 1 for all j and J r ;o ðzt Þ 5 1, J r ;s ðzt Þ 5 J r ;v ðzt Þ 5 0 for all
zt ∈ Z.
We use a similar algorithm to solve for the equilibrium in case 2. An
important difference between cases 1 and 2 is that, in case 2, without resolution of uncertainty, all agents become optimistic. Given our conjectures about the optimal decisions of the agents, this means the economy
does not converge to a steady state equivalent to an economy in which
ε* 5 E o(ε*). The reason is that in the latter economy, natural renters
choose to rent, whereas here, in the limit, all natural renters are optimistic and choose to buy. We provide the detailed solution method for
case 2 in Appendix C.
V. Model Calibration
In this section we discuss our procedure for calibrating the model. In
solving the model each period is 1 month long. We choose one set of parameters so that the steady state of the model is consistent with the longrun properties of the US housing market. We choose a second set of parameters, which controls the distribution of beliefs and their dynamics,
to match micro evidence on agents’ expectations about future house
prices and the self-perceived values of their homes during the recent
boom-bust episode. Here, we bring to bear new evidence on the evolution of different agents’ expectations of home values. Using the Case
and Shiller (2010) survey of homeowner expectations and the American
Housing Survey, we document that, during the boom episode, there was
a sharp increase in the difference between the mean and the median of expected appreciation in house prices and self-assessed home values across
agents.
According to the Standard & Poors/Case-Shiller US National Home
Price Index, house prices increased from 1994 to 2006 and declined
from 2006 to 2012. The value of the inflation-adjusted house price index in 2012 is about the same as in 1994. In light of this observation,
we interpret the recent boom-bust episode in the United States as one
in which skeptical and vulnerable agents never changed their views about
fundamentals (i.e., E s ðε* Þ 5 E v ðε* Þ 5 ε) and, ex post, skeptical agents
were correct.
In what follows, we want to be agnostic about whether or not the boom
ended because uncertainty about future fundamentals was realized. For
this reason, we use the quantitative implications of the model in case 1 to
guide our calibration. Recall that in this case, a boom-bust pattern occurs both when uncertainty is not realized and when uncertainty is real-

booms and busts in housing markets

1125

ized and the skeptical agents are correct.14 In evaluating the model, we
think of the US episode as a draw from the skeptical agent’s unconditional distribution about future housing fundamentals.
A.

Parameters Calibrated Using Steady-State Properties
of the Model

We first describe a set of parameters chosen to render the steady state
of the model consistent with selected first moments of the data. We set
the stock of houses, k, to 0.65. Recall that this value is the average fraction of homeowners in the US population. We choose m, the scale parameter in the matching function, so that the average time to sell a house is
approximately 6 months. This number is roughly equal to the average
time that it takes to sell an existing home, computed using data from
the National Association of Realtors for the period 1999–2012. It is also
consistent with the calibration in Piazzesi and Schneider (2009), which is
based on data from the American Housing Survey. We choose h so that
the probabilities of buying and selling coincide in the steady state. We
choose λ so that, in conjunction with our other assumptions, households
sell their homes, on average, every 15 years. This value is close to the one
used in Piazzesi and Schneider (2009). We set both the matching parameter (a) and the bargaining parameter (v) to 0.5 so as to treat buyers and
sellers symmetrically.
It is difficult to obtain direct evidence on the parameter k. In our
benchmark calibration we assume that k is equal to 62. This value implies
that the steady-state utility of a natural renter who buys a home is 32 percent lower than that of a natural home buyer. In conjunction with our
other assumptions, this value of k implies that it is not optimal for natural renters to buy homes in the steady state. We find that our results are
robust to reasonable perturbations in k. We choose b to be consistent with
an annual discount factor of 6 percent. In addition, we normalize ε to one
and ε 2 w to zero.
B. Parameters Governing Expectations and
Social Dynamics
We calibrate the six parameters E o(ε*), f, w, e s/e v, e o/e v, and z to match
an equally weighted system of nine features of the data. This procedure
is analogous to an overidentified version of generalized method of moments with an identity weighting matrix.
14
In case 2, a permanent boom occurs when uncertainty is not realized or when the optimistic agents are correct. A boom-bust pattern occurs only when uncertainty is realized
and the skeptical are correct.

1126

journal of political economy

Our quantitative analysis focuses on the three cities for which Case and
Shiller (2010) report expectations data: Boston, Los Angeles, and San
Francisco.15 We assume that the recent US boom-bust episode began in
March 1996 when the average real home price in our three cities was at
its lowest value in the 1990s. We assume that the episode ended in October 2006, the first month after which there is a sustained, uninterrupted
fall in real housing prices for our three cities.16 We focus on the years
2003, 2005, and 2006, the years during the episode for which we have expectations data (there are no data for 2004).17
The first feature of the data that we use in our calibration procedure
is the 1-year expected real appreciation. The three observations are reported in table 2.18
The next feature of the data that we use is the difference between the
mean and the median of the 1-year expected increase in home prices.
Again, we have three observations, reported in table 2. To motivate why
these statistics are of interest, recall that a central prediction of our model
is that, because of social dynamics, a boom in house prices is associated
with an increase in the fraction of optimistic agents. This increase generally implies a rise in the difference between the mean and the median
expected home price appreciation over the following year. Recall that the
fraction of optimistic agents is very small at the start of the boom and rises
over time before eventually declining. However, the fraction of optimistic
agents never exceeds 50 percent, so the median agent is always a vulnerable or a pessimistic agent. As the fraction of optimistic agents rises, the
mean across agents of the expected rate of home price appreciation also
rises. Taken together, these observations imply that the difference between the mean and the median expected appreciation rises in the boom
phase of the cycle.
Interestingly, a widening gap between mean and median values also
shows up in agents’ views of what their homes are worth. In the biannual
American Housing Survey (AHS), the Bureau of the Census asks homeowners the following question: “How much do you think your house
would sell for on today’s market?” Our analysis focuses, again, on homes
in Boston, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. We compute the percentage
difference between the mean and the median valuation for each city at
each point in time for the 1997–2009 period. This statistic is roughly zero
15
The survey also includes results for Milwaukee. We exclude these results because Milwaukee is not included in the S&P/Case-Shiller 20-City Composite Home Price Index.
16
By sustained, we mean one quarter or longer in duration.
17
In an updated version of their paper, Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012) provide
summary statistics for additional survey years in Alameda County (CA), Boston, Milwaukee,
and Orange County (CA).
18
These statistics are based on the average forecasts as reported by Case and Shiller
(2010, table 6). We use the US survey of professional forecasters to convert expected nominal appreciation into expected real appreciation.

booms and busts in housing markets

1127

TABLE 2
Homeowner Beliefs: Statistics from Survey Data

A. Case-Shiller mean expected price appreciation:
2003*
2005*
2006*
B. Case-Shiller mean minus median expected price appreciation:
2003*
2005*
2006*
C. AHS: mean minus median house valuation:
1997
1999
2001
2003*
2005*
2006*

Data

Model

5.3
7.9
3.6

7.4
7.1
7.1

.6
1.9
2.0

2.0
1.9
1.9

.0
4.3
10.7
14.4
20.0
19.7

2.3
3.1
12.7
16.8
17.9
18.3

Note.—In panels A and B, the table reports the mean and mean minus median expected
house price appreciation from homeowner surveys presented in Case and Shiller (2010).
We use data from three cities (Boston, Los Angeles, and San Francisco) and convert nominal forecasts to real as described in the main text. In the column Model, we report the
analogue figures from our model treating 2006 as the peak of the house price boom. In
panel C, we report statistics based on the biannual American Housing Survey, in which
the Bureau of the Census asks homeowners the question “How much do you think your
house would sell for on today’s market?” We use responses collected in Boston, Los Angeles,
and San Francisco. We report the average percentage difference between the median and
the mean valuation for these cities. Figures for 2006 are interpolated from the 2005 and
2007 surveys. In the column “Model” we report the analogue figures from our model when
we treat 2006 as the peak of the house price boom. These are based on the mean and
median utility levels of homeowners and home sellers in our model.
* The survey moment is included in our calibration exercise.

in 1997 and remains close to zero until around 2000. Table 2 reports the
average of this statistic across the three cities. We use the observations for
2003, 2005, and 2006 in our calibration exercise.
C. Computing Model Moments
To compute the analogue to the first three statistics discussed above (expected house price appreciation), we proceed as follows. First, we compute the 1-year-ahead expected appreciation for optimistic, skeptical, and
vulnerable homeowners. We then compute the weighted average of these
expectations. We also compute, as an analogue to the second group of
three statistics, the mean minus median expectations of house price appreciation across homeowners.
A key issue is how to map the AHS question (relevant for the last three
statistics) into our model. One possibility is that agents report the average price paid for a house at time t. All agents in the model know current
market prices. So under this interpretation, there should be no disper-

1128

journal of political economy

sion in response to the AHS question and the mean and the median responses should coincide. This implication is clearly inconsistent with table 2. We infer that this interpretation of the question is implausible from
the perspective of our model.
It is possible that the difference between the mean and median responses reflects systematic changes in the market value of idiosyncratic
house characteristics during the boom episode. This interpretation strikes
us as implausible because the mean minus the median is close to zero in
1997 and then rises dramatically.
In what follows, we suppose that agents respond to the AHS question
by reporting the value that they attach to their home. In our model, the
mean value is a weighted average of Hje ðzt Þ and U je ðzt Þ, where the weights
are the fractions of happy and unhappy homeowners of each type j 5 o,
v, s. Current market prices have a direct effect on U je ðzt Þ since the agent
is trying to sell the house. Market prices affect Hje ðzt Þ because happy
homeowners might become home sellers in the future. The AHS does
not distinguish whether survey respondents currently have their home
on the market or not. So we do not make this distinction when we compute the mean and median values implied by our model.
D. Calibrated Parameters
Table 1 reports the calibrated parameter values. Two key features are worth
noting. First, the percentage of the population that are optimistic at time
0 is very small, so a boom-bust episode is triggered by a small number of
agents. Second, the entropy ratio e o/e v is slightly larger than e s/e v. Other
things equal, this small difference enables the model to generate a gradual boom-bust pattern, even in the absence of resolution of uncertainty.
VI. Quantitative Properties of the Model
In this section we discuss the quantitative properties of our model. The
first subsection reports the model’s implications for various moments of
the data, including those used in the overidentified calibration procedure. In the second subsection we discuss the house price dynamics implied by cases 1 and 2. Finally, we compute and analyze the unconditional expected price paths for the different agents in our economy.
A.

Implications for Data Moments

Table 2 reports the model’s implications for various moments of the data.
A number of key results emerge with respect to the moments targeted by
the calibration procedure. First, the model captures the fact that agents expected substantial appreciation in housing prices in the period 2003–6.

booms and busts in housing markets

1129

Our model somewhat overstates the average expected appreciation, which
is 7.2 percent in our model and 5.6 percent in the data. Second, the model
is also consistent with average mean minus median expected rate of home
price appreciation over the boom years of the episode. The average value
of this statistic over the period 2003–6 is 1.9 percent in the model and
1.5 percent in the data. Third, the model does well at accounting for the
difference between the self-assessed mean minus median home values reported in the AHS for the 2003–6 period. The average value of this statistic is 18 percent in both the data and the model.
We now turn to four features that are not targeted by the calibration
procedure. First, consider the AHS-based statistics reported in table 2.
Notice that in the data the self-assessed mean minus median home value
is equal to zero in 1997 and then peaks at 20 percent near the end of the
episode. The model succeeds at capturing the magnitude of the rise and
the shape of the rise, even though the pre-2003 values were not part of
our calibration procedure. This success clearly reflects the presence of
heterogeneous expectations and social dynamics. Second, the model does
extremely well at accounting for the rise in house prices in the beginning
of the episode. A key feature of the data is that housing prices rise very
slowly in the initial phases of the boom-bust episode. For example, the
Case-Shiller index for the three cities rose by 1.3 percent from March
1996 (the trough) to March 1997. In our model, house prices do not
jump in the beginning of the episode. Rather, they slowly start to rise.
We view this property as an important success because in standard rational expectations models, asset prices move substantially on impact in response to news about future fundamentals. Third, the length of the boom
episode is 10.6 years in the data. According to the model, the time at
which the expected price is maximized is 13.1 years from the beginning
of the episode. So our model does reasonably well at generating the prolonged nature of the observed boom-bust episode. Finally, the mean value
of the maximum percentage rise in house prices implied by the model is
289 percent. In the data this rise is 144 percent. So, judging by these statistics alone, the model overestimates the magnitude of the boom. We
can use the model to compute the probability distribution of the maximum rise in prices. We find that a 144 percent boom lies at the 23rd percentile of this distribution. We infer that a boom-bust of the sort observed
in the United States is not particularly unlikely from the perspective of
our model.
B. Analyzing Model Dynamics, Case 1
We now analyze model dynamics in case 1 at our calibrated parameter
levels. In this case, the pdf of the skeptical agents has the lowest entropy
(e s < e o < e v). The resulting social dynamics are displayed in figure 1a,

1130

journal of political economy

while figure 5 describes various features of the model along a path on
which uncertainty is not realized. The key features of this path can be
summarized as follows. First, average home prices rise and then fall as
the infection waxes and wanes. Even though agents have perfect foresight up to the resolution of long-run uncertainty, the initial rise in price
is very small. Second, the average transaction price comoves strongly with
the number of potential buyers. Third, the number of transactions comoves strongly with the average house price. Fourth, as prices rise, there
is a “sellers’ market” in the sense that the probability of selling is high
and the probability of buying is low.
Consistent with our discussion in Section III, movements in the number of potential buyers are the key drivers of price dynamics in the model.
Over time, the number of potential buyers rises from roughly 1.9 percent to a peak value of roughly 13.6 percent of the population and then
declines.

F IG . 5.—Equilibrium of the matching model with social dynamics, case 1. The figures
illustrate equilibrium paths when there is no resolution of uncertainty for the matching
model with social dynamics in case 1, in which the priors of skeptical agents have the lowest
entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents have the highest entropy. The number of
potential buyers is calculated after preferences shocks have been realized. Here, b s, b v, and
b o represent the populations of skeptical, vulnerable, and optimistic natural buyers, while
r o is the population of optimistic natural renters.

booms and busts in housing markets

1131

In the boom phase of the cycle, the number of potential buyers rises
for two reasons. First, in contrast to the model without social dynamics,
optimistic natural renters want to buy homes. At the peak of the infection, roughly 21 percent of natural renters are optimistic and account
for 42 percent of potential buyers (see fig. 5). Second, as more buyers enter the market, the average amount of time to purchase a house rises
from 6 to 37 months, while the average time to sell a house drops from
6 months to just over 1 month. To understand these results, recall that
the probabilities of buying and selling a home depend on the ratio of
buyers to sellers (see eqq. [46] and [47]). Other things equal, the inflow
of optimistic natural renters into the housing market increases the number of buyers, thereby lowering the probability of buying a house and
raising the probability of selling a house. The latter effect reduces the
stock of unhappy homeowners, thus reinforcing the fall in the probability of buying and the rise in the probability of selling a house. As the infection wanes, the number of buyers falls and the number of sellers rises,
so the probabilities of buying and selling a house return to their steadystate values.
To understand how changes in the number of buyers and sellers affect prices, we exploit the intuition about transition dynamics discussed
in Section IV. The average purchase price is a weighted average of the
price paid by four types of agents: optimistic natural renters and optimistic,
skeptical, and vulnerable natural buyers.
The price paid by each of these agents depends positively on their reservation price (see eqq. [57] and [58]). Each reservation price is the difference between the value to that agent of being a homeowner and a
home buyer (see eqq. [52] and [54]). When the probability of buying
is low, the value functions of all potential buyers are low because it is more
difficult to realize the utility gains from purchasing a home. When the
probability of selling is high, the value functions of unhappy homeowners are high because it takes less time to sell a home. The value functions
of homeowners are also high because, with probability h, they become
unhappy homeowners.
As more agents become optimistic, the probability of buying falls and
the probability of selling rises. As a result, the reservation prices of the
different potential buyers rise, leading to a rise in purchase prices.
From figure 5 we see that the optimistic natural buyers pay the highest
price. These agents derive a high utility from owning a home and have a
high expectation of ε*. The next-highest price is paid by skeptical natural
buyers. These agents also derive a high utility from owning a home, but
they have a lower expectation of ε* than optimistic natural buyers. Vulnerable and skeptical natural buyers have the same expectation of ε*, so they
pay the same price. Optimistic natural renters pay the lowest price. On the
one hand, these agents enjoy the house less than natural buyers. On the

1132

journal of political economy

other hand, they have a higher expectation of ε* than skeptical and vulnerable natural buyers. For the case being considered the first effect outweighs the second effect.
The presence of optimistic natural renters has two effects. Taking the
prices paid by other agents as given, the presence of optimistic natural
renters reduces the average price. However, the presence of optimistic
renters increases the number of potential buyers, thereby creating a congestion effect that reduces the probability of buying a home. As discussed
above, this reduction increases the transactions price paid by the other
agents in the system. In our example, the second effect dominates the
first effect.
C. Quantifying the Congestion Effect
One way to quantify the importance of the congestion effect is to redo
the experiment but not allow optimistic renters to purchase homes. By
construction, in this experiment the probability of buying and selling
a home is constant, since the number of potential buyers and sellers is
unaffected by the infection. It turns out that the average sale price is
hardly affected by social dynamics. Average prices go up in this experiment only as a result of a rise in the reservation price of optimistic natural buyers. This price is the difference between the value of a being a
new homeowner who is optimistic, ð1 2 hÞHo ðzt11 Þ 1 hU o ðzt11 Þ, and the
value of being an optimistic natural buyer, Bo ðzt11 Þ. The value of becoming a homeowner increases if a vulnerable agent becomes optimistic. But
the value of being an optimistic natural buyer also increases because an
optimistic agent has a high expected value of ε*. In contrast to the situation in which the congestion effect is operative, here the probability of
buying a home remains constant, so there is no countervailing effect on
the optimistic natural buyers’ value functions. The net result is a small
increase in the reservation price of optimistic buyers.
D. What Happens When Uncertainty Is Resolved?
Figure 6 shows the average behavior of the price if uncertainty is realized
in year 15. The solid line depicts the actual house price up to the period
when uncertainty is realized. The dashed line shows the average price
path that vulnerable/skeptical agents expect after uncertainty is realized. Interestingly, these agents do not expect the price to converge immediately to its steady value after uncertainty is realized. The reason is
that, when uncertainty is resolved, the number of natural buyers exceeds
its steady-state value. The transition to the steady state is governed by the
transition dynamics of the homogeneous expectations model. As emphasized in Section III, when the number of natural buyers exceeds its

booms and busts in housing markets

1133

F IG . 6.—Expected prices after the resolution of uncertainty, case 1. The figure illustrates
the equilibrium price (solid line) if uncertainty is not realized until the end of year 15. The
dashed line indicates the prices the skeptical and vulnerable agents would expect to observe after year 15, if uncertainly were resolved at that date.

steady-state value, the price converges to its steady-state value gradually
from above.
Figure 6 helps us understand why a skeptical or vulnerable natural
buyer is willing to buy a house even around the peak in housing prices.
At this point, the price is much higher than the steady-state price that
these agents expect. Even if uncertainty is resolved in the following period, agents expect the fall in the price to be relatively small because the
number of potential home buyers is significantly above its steady-state
value. Even if a home buyer becomes an unhappy homeowner, the expected capital loss on the house is expected to be relatively small. As a consequence, the gains from living in the house outweigh the expected capital loss.
Optimistic agents expect a large capital gain when uncertainty is realized. The expected gain is so large that it induces natural renters to try to
purchase a home. They are willing to do so because the expected gains
from speculation outweigh their disposition to rent rather than buy.

1134

journal of political economy

Figure 6 shows that there is a discontinuous jump up or down in house
prices when uncertainty is realized. We do not observe these types of
jumps in the data. The discontinuity reflects the stark nature of how information is revealed in the model. This feature would be eliminated if
information about long-run fundamentals gradually percolates throughout the economy as in Duffie, Giroux, and Manso (2010) and Andrei
and Cujean (2013).
E. Analyzing Model Dynamics, Case 2
We now analyze model dynamics in case 2 at our calibrated parameter
levels.19 In this case, the pdf of the optimistic agents has the lowest entropy (e o < e s < e v). The same economic forces discussed above are at work
here. The key difference is that, without resolution of uncertainty, the
entire population becomes optimistic (see fig. 1b). As a consequence, the
number of optimistic renters rises and remains high until uncertainty is
resolved. So, the number of potential buyers remains high and the congestion effect is operative until then. Not surprisingly, therefore, in case 2
the probability of buying (selling) remains lower (higher) than in case 1,
until uncertainty is resolved. Consequently, the volume of transactions
does not return to its original steady-state level.
Finally, figure 7 displays the price path in the absence of resolution of
uncertainty. As in case 1, the significant boom phase of the price rise
takes place before year 15. The boom is larger than in case 1, reflecting
the larger number of potential buyers. After year 15, the price continues
to rise slowly until uncertainty is resolved.
F. Expected Price Paths
We now discuss the properties of the time 0 expectations of time t prices
for optimistic and skeptical agents. For t > 0 these are
E j0 ðP t Þ 5 ð1 2 fÞt P½Gt ðz0 Þ 1

t

o fð1 2 fÞ εo∈F f
t51
t21

*

 P fG

t2t

j

ðε* Þ

ð61Þ

½LG ðz0 Þ; ε* g:
t

The first term in equation (61) reflects the possibility that uncertainty
has not yet been resolved by the end of time t. The probability of this
event, (1 2 f)t, is multiplied by P½Gt ðz0 Þ, the price at time t in that state
of the world. Here Gt ð⋅Þ is the law of motion of the state variables invoked t times, so it represents zt . The second term in equation (61) reflects the possibility that uncertainty is resolved at time t ≤ t, an event that
19

For computational reasons, we assume that k 5 65 in case 2.

booms and busts in housing markets

1135

F IG . 7.—Equilibrium of the matching model with social dynamics, case 2. The figures
illustrate equilibrium paths when there is no resolution of uncertainty for the matching
model with social dynamics in case 2, in which the priors of optimistic agents have the lowest entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents have the highest entropy. The number
of potential buyers is calculated after preferences shocks have been realized. Here, bs, bv,
and bo represent the populations of skeptical, vulnerable, and optimistic natural buyers,
while ro is the population of optimistic natural renters.

occurs with probability f(1 2 f)t21. This probability is multiplied by the
price that agent j expects to occur at time t if uncertainty is realized at
time t. Here, G t2t ½LGt ðz0 Þ represents zt since Gt ðz0 Þ represents zt , Lzt represents zt, and Gt2t(⋅) represents the law of motion after the resolution of
uncertainty invoked t 2 t times.
Figure 8a depicts, for case 1, the price paths expected by different
agents. Optimistic agents expect prices to rise rapidly until year 17 and to
remain relatively high. Skeptical agents expect prices to rise up to year 13,
although by less than optimistic agents. Thereafter, skeptical agents expect prices to revert gradually to their old steady-state levels.
Figure 8b depicts, for case 2, the price paths expected by different
agents. The key property to notice is that, while there are quantitative
differences, the patterns are remarkably similar. Skeptical agents expect
a boom that is followed by a bust while optimistic agents expect a boom
that is not followed by a bust. Qualitatively this is the same result that
we obtained with the frictionless model of Section III. Once again, an

1136

journal of political economy

F IG . 8.—Expected price paths, matching model with social dynamics: a, case 1; b, case 2.
The graphs show the price paths expected by different types of agents at time 0. In case 1,
the priors of skeptical agents have the lowest entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable
agents have the highest entropy. In case 2, the priors of optimistic agents have the lowest
entropy, and the priors of the vulnerable agents have the highest entropy.

econometrician taking repeated samples from our data would see both
boom-busts and booms that are not followed by busts. The boom-bust
episodes typically occur in economies in which the skeptical agents happen to be correct. The booms that are not followed by busts typically occur in economies in which optimistic agents happen to be correct.
VII.

Some Additional Evidence on Key Mechanisms
in the Model

In this section, we present some additional evidence on the mechanisms
at work in our model. Our model attributes a key role to buyers with

booms and busts in housing markets

1137

speculative motives. Booms (busts) are marked by increases (decreases)
in the number of agents who buy homes primarily because of large expected capital gains (natural renters). It is obviously difficult to measure
the importance of such buyers. However, the Michigan Survey of Consumers provides us with some indirect information. The survey includes
the question “Is it a good time to buy a home because it is a good investment?” Figure 9 displays the percentage of respondents answering yes to
this question from 1996 to 2012, along with the percentage change in

F IG . 9.—Sentiment, housing transactions, and house price changes. In all panels the
dashed line is the percentage change in the inflation-adjusted Case-Shiller national house
price index. Panel a shows survey data from the Michigan Survey of Consumers. The solid
line shows the percentage of respondents answering “yes” to the question “Is it a good time
to buy a home because it is a good investment?” Panels b and c show data from the National
Association of Realtors. Panel b shows the probability of selling (the ratio of sales to inventories for existing homes) as the solid line. Panel c shows sales of existing homes as the solid
line.

1138

journal of political economy

the inflation-adjusted Case-Shiller national price index. There is a clear
increase in the number of respondents who thought housing was a good
investment during the boom period and a sharp decline during the bust
phase.
Suppose we assume that a rise in the number of first-time buyers is
likely to come from the pool of natural renters. Then, an additional piece
of evidence consistent with our model is that housing booms are accompanied by an increase in the number of first-time buyers. Data from
the Current Population Survey show that the number of homes owned
by individuals 29 years old and younger increased by 34 percent between 1994 and 2005 and decreased by 20 percent between 2005 and
2012. The numbers are even more dramatic for individuals aged 25
and younger, with the rise and fall equaling 73 and 24 percent, respectively. In a similar vein, Holmans (1995) documents a large rise and fall
in the number of first-time buyers during the UK boom-bust episode of
the late 1980s and early 1990s. Evidence along the same lines comes from
the housing expectations survey data used by Case et al. (2012). From
2003 on, first-time buyers had consistently higher expectations of price
appreciation than other buyers. The difference between the 1-year-ahead
rate of return expected by first-time buyers and other buyers ranges from
1.1 percent in 2003 to 5.4 percent in 2006. Taken together, the previous
evidence is supportive of the important role that our model ascribes to
speculative buyers in boom and bust episodes.
A core implication of our model is that a boom (bust) in house prices
is associated with an increase (decrease) in the probability of selling a
house. To assess this implication, we use data from the National Association of Realtors on inventories and sales of existing homes covering the
period 1999–2012. We compute the monthly probability of a sale as the
ratio of sales to inventories of existing homes for sale. The annual probability of a sale is the average of the monthly probabilities in a given year.
Figure 9 shows that there is a striking comovement between this probability and the rate of change in the inflation-adjusted Case-Shiller price
index. Both series rise from 1999 until the end of 2005 and then drop
sharply until 2008 before recovering.
Our model also implies that booms (busts) are associated with an increase (decrease) in the volume of transactions. Figure 9 provides empirical evidence on the volume of transactions. Transaction volume rose,
reaching a peak in 2005, before falling dramatically through 2009. This
pattern is consistent with evidence in Stein (1995).
Recall that, according to our model, an unusually large number of potential buyers enter the market during booms. Their desire to purchase
a home is primarily driven by speculative motives. The entry of these
agents makes it easier to sell existing homes and increases the overall
level of activity in the housing market. During the bust phase, speculative

booms and busts in housing markets

1139

buyers exit the market, driving down the probability of selling a home
and the volume of transactions. So our model implies that the extensive
margin plays a critical role in house price dynamics. Taken together, we
interpret the evidence in figure 9 as supportive of this implication.
VIII. Conclusion
Boom-bust episodes are pervasive in housing markets. They occur in different countries and in different time periods. These episodes are hard
to understand from the perspective of conventional models in which
agents have homogeneous expectations. In this paper we propose a model
in which agents have different views about long-run fundamentals. Social
interactions can generate temporary increases in the fraction of agents
who hold a particular view about long-run fundamentals. The resulting dynamics can produce boom-bust cycles as well as booms that are not followed by busts.
Our model abstracts from financial frictions. It is clear to us that the
ability of many young buyers to buy a home is influenced by down payment requirements and credit conditions. An implication of our model
is that if young buyers are optimistic but cannot buy a house, say because
they are credit constrained, boom-bust cycles in house prices are greatly
muted. Indeed, this situation corresponds to the experiment in our
model in which we lock out optimistic natural renters from the housing
market. In this case there are no congestion effects and there are no pronounced boom-bust cycles. But there is no presumption that a policy of
requiring high down payments would be welfare improving because this
policy would presumably apply to both natural buyers and natural renters. More generally, policies aimed at curbing rapid price increases are
not obviously welfare improving in our model because, in the end, we
do not know who is right about the future: the vulnerable, the skeptical,
or the optimistic.
Appendix A
Internalizing Changes in Agent Type
In the main text we assume that agents do not take into account the possibility
that they may change their type as a result of social interactions. Here we assess
the quantitative impact of this assumption by calculating equilibrium prices
when agents do internalize the possibility that they may change their type.
In case 1, in the absence of resolution of uncertainty, all agents become skeptical as t goes to infinity and the terminal price is equal to the fundamental price
of a skeptical agent (P s in eq. [12]). In case 2, in the absence of resolution of uncertainty, all agents become optimistic as t goes to infinity and the terminal price
is equal to the fundamental price of an optimistic agent (P o in eq. [11]). Using

1140

journal of political economy

these terminal prices, we can compute the equilibrium price path in a recursive
fashion.
When ot ≥ k, optimistic agents are the marginal homeowners. In this case the
equilibrium price is given by
P t 5 ð1 2 gso s t Þb½fE o ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ
1 gso s t b½fE s ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ:
Recall that Pt 1 1 and P *t11 are the t 1 1 prices when uncertainty is not realized
and when uncertainty is realized, respectively. Here an optimistic agent takes
into account that with probability gsost he becomes skeptical at time t 1 1 and values the house as a skeptical agent. The value of gso is positive in case 1 but equal
to zero in case 2.
When ot < k and ot 1 vt ≥ k, vulnerable agents are the marginal homeowners
even if st ≥ k. Vulnerable agents have higher valuations than skeptical agents because they have a higher probability of becoming optimistic. In this case the
equilibrium price is given by
P t 5 ð1 2 gov o t 2 gsv s t Þb½fE v ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ
1 gov o t b½fE o ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ
1 gsv s t b½fE s ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ:
Here the vulnerable agent takes into account that with probability govot he becomes optimistic and values the house as an optimistic agent. Also, with probability gsvst he becomes skeptical and values the house as a skeptical agent.
Finally, when ot < k and ot 1 vt < k, the marginal homeowner is a skeptical agent.
In this case the equilibrium price is given by
P t 5 gos o t b½fE o ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ
1 ð1 2 gos o t Þb½fE s ðε* 1 P *t11 Þ 1 ð1 2 fÞðε 1 P t11 Þ:
Here the skeptical agent takes into account that, with probability gosot he becomes
optimistic and values the house as an optimistic agent. Recall that gos is zero in
case 1 but is positive in case 2.
We redo the experiment that underlies figure 2 using the same parameter values. The basic finding is that internalizing changes in agent type makes virtually
no difference to our results. The basic reason is that the probability of switching
types is small. For instance, in case 1, the maximum values of govot and gsost in our
numerical example are 3 percent and 0.33 percent, respectively. In the main
text we abstract from this effect to simplify our computations.

Appendix B
An Alternative Interpretation of Social Dynamics
In this appendix we describe an alternative environment that generates social dynamics that are similar to those of our model. In this example agents have heterogeneous priors and receive private signals. Suppose that the agents who are

booms and busts in housing markets

1141

initially optimistic or skeptical have very sharp priors. Agents who are initially vulnerable have very diffuse priors. All agents receive uninformative private signals.
Vulnerable agents have sharp priors that the posteriors of optimistic and skeptical agents are the product of initially diffuse priors and very informative signals.
So when a vulnerable agent meets an optimistic (skeptical) agent, his posterior
becomes arbitrarily close to that of the optimistic (skeptical) agent. We refer to a
vulnerable agent who has a posterior that is very close to that of an optimistic
(skeptical) agent as optimistic (skeptical).
We reinterpret gl j as the probability that agents of type l meet agents of type j.
We assume that gvs 5 gvo 5 g and that gso 5 0; that is, skeptical and optimistic
agents have no social interactions. Under our assumptions the dynamics of
the fraction of the population with different views are similar to those generated
by our model of social dynamics. Our assumptions about gl j eliminate the convergence of posteriors that is a generic property of Bayesian environments. As
a result, we preserve the property that different agents agree to disagree.20 To obtain dynamics similar to cases 1 and 2, we need to introduce a slight asymmetry
between skeptical and optimistic agents. A simple, albeit mechanical, way to introduce this asymmetry is to suppose that in case 1 (case 2) a small fraction d of
optimistic (skeptical) agents exogenously change their view to those of skeptical
(optimistic) agents.
The view of social segmentation embodied in our assumptions about gl j is consistent with the notion that agents who are strongly committed to a point of view
limit their interactions to sources of information and individuals who are likely
to confirm their own views. This phenomenon is discussed by Sunstein (2001)
and Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005). The latter authors summarize research in
psychology, communications, and information theory that is consistent with the
social segmentation hypothesis. More recently, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011)
find evidence that people tend to have close social interactions with people who
have similar political views. Social segmentation is related to what sociologists call
“homophily”: contact between similar people occurs at a higher rate than contact
among dissimilar people (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001).

Appendix C
In this appendix we describe the laws of motion for the fractions of the population accounted for by the 12 types of agents in the model of Section V. The values of glj, which depend on the ratio of the entropies of the pdfs of agents l and j,
are defined in equation (3). Recall that gos 5 0 in case 1 and gso 5 0 in case 2.
A. Homeowners
We denote the fraction of homeowners of type j ( j 5 o, s, v) in the beginning of
the period, after preference shocks occur, after social interactions occur, and af-

20
Acemoglu et al. (2007) provide an alternative environment in which agents agree to disagree because they are uncertain about the interpretation of the signals that they receive.

1142

journal of political economy
j 0
t

ter purchases and sales occur by h , ðh Þ , ðh tj Þ00 , and h jt11 , respectively. The laws of
motion for these variables are given by
j
t

0

ðh tj Þ 5 h jt ð1 2 hÞ;
v 00
t

v 0
t

j 5 o; s; v;

v 0
t
t

ðC1Þ

v 0
t
t

ðh Þ 5 ðh Þ 2 g ðh Þ s 2 g ðh Þ o ;
sv

ov

ðC2Þ

ðh st Þ00 5 ðh st Þ0 1 gsv ðh vt Þ0 s t 2 gos ðh st Þ0 o t 1 gso ðh ot Þ0 s t ;
o 00
t

o 0
t

v 0
t
t

o 0
t
t

s 0
t
t

ðh Þ 5 ðh Þ 1 g ðh Þ o 2 g ðh Þ s 1 g ðh Þ o ;
h

j
t11

ov

j 00
t

so

os

j 00
t

j 00
t

5 ðh Þ 1 qb ðzt ÞJ b;j ðzt Þðb Þ 1 qb ðzt ÞJ r ;j ðzt Þðr Þ ;

j 5 o; s; v:

ðC3Þ
ðC4Þ
ðC5Þ

B. Unhappy Homeowners
We denote the fraction of unhappy homeowners of type j ( j 5 o, s, v) in the beginning of the period, after preference shocks occur, after social interactions occur, and after purchases and sales occur by u jt , ðu jt Þ0 , ðu jt Þ00 , and u jt11 , respectively.
The laws of motion for these variables are given by
0

ðu tj Þ 5 u jt 1 hh tj ;

j 5 o; s; v;

ðC6Þ

ðu vt Þ00 5 ðu vt Þ0 2 gsv ðu vt Þ0 s t 2 gov ðu vt Þ0 o t ;
s 00
t

s 0
t

o 00
t

o 0
t

v 0
t
t

s 0
t
t

ðC7Þ
o 0
t
t

ðC8Þ

s 0
t
t

ðC9Þ

ðu Þ 5 ðu Þ 1 g ðu Þ s 2 g ðu Þ o 1 g ðu Þ s ;
sv

os

v 0
t
t

so

o 0
t
t

ðu Þ 5 ðu Þ 1 gov ðu Þ o 2 gso ðu Þ s 1 gos ðu Þ o ;
u

j
t11

j 00
t

j 00
t

5 ðu Þ 2 q ðzt ÞJ ðzt Þðu Þ ;
s

u;j

j 5 o; s; v:

ðC10Þ

C. Natural Buyers
We denote the fraction of natural buyers of type j ( j 5 o, s, v) in the beginning of
the period, after preference shocks occur, after social interactions occur, and after purchases and sales occur by b jt , ðb jt Þ0 , ðb jt Þ00 , and b jt11 , respectively. The laws of
motion for these variables are given by
0

ðb tj Þ 5 b tj 1 λr tj ;

j 5 o; s; v;

ðC11Þ

ðb vt Þ00 5 ðb vt Þ0 2 gsv ðb vt Þ0 s t 2 gov ðb vt Þ0 o t ;
s 00
t

s 0
t

v 0
t
t

s 0
t
t

ðC12Þ
o 0
t
t

ðb Þ 5 ðb Þ 1 g ðb Þ s 2 g ðb Þ o 1 g ðb Þ s ;

ðC13Þ

ðb ot Þ00 5 ðb ot Þ0 1 gov ðb vt Þ0 o t 2 gso ðb ot Þ0 s t 1 gos ðb st Þ0 o t ;

ðC14Þ

b

j
t11

j 00
t

sv

os

j 00
t

5 ðb Þ 2 q ðzt ÞJ ðzt Þðb Þ ;
b

b;j

so

j 5 o; s; v:

ðC15Þ

D. Natural Renters
We denote the fraction of natural renters of type j ( j 5 o, s, v) in the beginning of
the period, after preference shocks occur, after social interactions occur, and after purchases and sales occur by r jt , ðr jt Þ0 , ðr jt Þ00 , and r jt11 , respectively. The laws of
motion for these variables are given by

booms and busts in housing markets
0

ðr jt Þ 5 r jt ð1 2 λÞ;
v 00
t

v 0
t

1143
j 5 o; s; v;

v 0
t
t

ðC16Þ

v 0
t
t

ðr Þ 5 ðr Þ 2 g ðr Þ s 2 g ðr Þ o ;
sv

ov

ðC17Þ

ðr st Þ00 5 ðr st Þ0 1 gsv ðr vt Þ0 s t 2 gos ðr st Þ0 o t 1 gso ðr ot Þ0 s t ;
o 00
t

o 0
t

v 0
t
t

o 0
t
t

ðC18Þ

s 0
t
t

ðr Þ 5 ðr Þ 1 g ðr Þ o 2 g ðr Þ s 1 g ðr Þ o ;
r

j
t11

ov

j 00
t

so

j 00
t

os

j 00
t

5 ðr Þ 2 qb ðzt ÞJ r ;j ðzt Þðr Þ 1 qs ðzt ÞJ u;j ðzt Þðu Þ ;

ðC19Þ

j 5 o; s; v:

ðC20Þ

E. The Limiting Steady State When Uncertainty Is Not Realized, Case 1
We denote by H(ε*), U(ε*), B(ε*), and R(ε*) the steady state of the value functions
of different agents in the economy when uncertainty is realized and the realized
utility of owning a home is ε*. These values are computed by solving the system of
equations (23), (24), (28), (29), (32), (31), and (44), setting B 5 B buy and R 5 R rent
and replacing ε in equation (23) with the different possible values of ε*. Then let
j
V 5

of

j

ε* ∈F

ðε* ÞV ðz; ε* Þ;

ðC21Þ

where V represents H, U, B, or R, and z 5 (h, b)0 , with h and b being the steadystate values of h and b from Section III. The limiting value functions of different
agents along a path in which uncertainty is not resolved can be obtained by solv b;s and for j 5 o, v, s,
ing the following system of equations for Hj , U j , Bj , Rj , and P
unless indicated otherwise:
 j 1 hU j g;
Hj 5 ε 1 bfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 hÞHj 1 hU j  1 f½ð1 2 hÞH
 1 λB
 g
U 5 q P 1 q bfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 λÞR 1 λB  1 f½ð1 2 λÞR
j

s

j

s

j

j

j

 j ;
1 ð1 2 q s Þb½ð1 2 fÞU j 1 fU
 u;j 5
P

ðC22Þ

j

b
fð1 2 fÞ½U j 2 ð1 2 λÞRj 2 λBj 
11w

ðC23Þ

ðC24Þ

 j 2 λB
 j g;
 j 2 ð1 2 λÞR
1 f½U
Bj 5 ε 2 w 2 q b P b;j 1 q b bfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 hÞHj 1 hU j 
 1 hU
 g 1 ð1 2 q b Þb½ð1 2 fÞBj 1 fB
 ;
1 f½ð1 2 hÞH
j

j

j

 b;j 5 bfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 hÞHj 1 hU j 2 Bj 
P
 j 1 hU
j 2B
 j g;
1 f½ð1 2 hÞH
Rj 5 ε 2 w 1 bfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 λÞRj 1 λBj 
 j 1 λB
 j g;
1 f½ð1 2 λÞR

j 5 s; v;

ðC25Þ

ðC26Þ

ðC27Þ

Ro 5 ε 2 w 2 q b ðP r ;o 1 kεÞ 1 q b bfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 hÞHo 1 hU o 
 1 hU g 1 ð1 2 q b Þbfð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 λÞRo 1 λBo 
1 f½ð1 2 hÞH
o

o

 1 λB
 g;
1 f½ð1 2 λÞR
o

o

ðC28Þ

1144

journal of political economy
 r ;j 5 bð1 2 fÞ½ð1 2 hÞHj 1 hU j 2 ð1 2 λÞRj 2 λBj 
P
 j 1 hU
 j 2 ð1 2 λÞR
 j 2 λB
 j  2 kε:
1 bf½ð1 2 hÞH

ðC29Þ

Recall that in the limit all agents are skeptical, and we have conjectured that skeptical natural renters do not choose to buy, thus simplifying expressions for average prices:

P b;j 5 vP

b;j

 ;
1 ð1 2 vÞP

ðC30Þ


P r ;j 5 vP

r ;j

u;s

 ;
1 ð1 2 vÞP

ðC31Þ

 ;
1 ð1 2 vÞP

ðC32Þ


P 5 vP
j

b;s

u;s

u;j

P 5 Ps :

ðC33Þ

The probabilities of buying and selling are given by
q s 5 q b 5 m:

ðC34Þ

F. The Limiting Steady State When Uncertainty Is Not Realized, Case 2
In case 2, all agents become optimistic in the limit when uncertainty is not realized. Given our conjectured optimal decision rules, optimistic natural buyers
and natural renters choose to buy homes prior to the resolution of uncertainty.
This means that the limiting populations, ht, ut, bt, and rt, do not correspond to
their initial steady-state values. The reason is that the initial steady state is a constant solution to equations (36)–(41) and (45)–(47) with J r 5 0, whereas here
the limiting case is a constant solution to equations (36)–(41) and (45)–(47)
~ ~b,
with J r 5 1. We denote the values of ht, bt, q st , and q bt in this limiting case as h,
0 21
s
b
~
~
~q , and q~ , and we let ~z 5 ðh; bÞ .
Next we denote by H ð~z ; ε* Þ, U ð~z ; ε* Þ, Bð~z ; ε* Þ, and Rð~z ; ε* Þ the value functions of
different agents in the economy when uncertainty is realized and the realized
utility of owning a home is ε*. These values are computed using the same methods we used to compute utilities for the transitions dynamics case in Section III.
Then we define
j
V 5

of

ε* ∈F

j

ðε* ÞV ð~z ; ε* Þ;

ðC35Þ

where V represents H, U, B, or R . With this different definition of V j in place and
using ~q s and q~b in place of q s and q b, we can solve for the limiting value functions
21
In solving the model for case 2 we have to make a minor modification to the matching
technology and write it as

; Sellerst ; Buyerst g:
m t 5 minfmSellersat Buyers12a
t
This ensures that the probabilities of buying and selling are bounded between zero and
one. In solving case 1 we found that these constraints never bind. In case 2, in the limiting
case, q~s 5 1.

booms and busts in housing markets

1145

and reservation prices of different agents along a path in which uncertainty is
not resolved using equations (C22)–(C29). Since, in the limit, all agents are optimistic, the expressions for average prices are

P b;j 5 vP

b;j

 ;
1 ð1 2 vÞP

ðC36Þ

u;o

 r ;j 1 ð1 2 vÞP
 u;o ;
P r ;j 5 vP
Pj 5 v


½~b 1 λð1 2 k 2 ~b ÞP


1 ð1 2 λÞð1 2 k 2 ~b ÞP
12k

b;o

P 5 Po :

ðC37Þ
r ;o

 ;
1 ð1 2 vÞP
u;j

ðC38Þ
ðC39Þ

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, and Muhamet Yildiz. 2007. “Learning
and Disagreement in an Uncertain World.” Manuscript, Dept. Econ., Massachusetts Inst. Tech.
Ambrose, Brent W., Piet Eichholtz, and Thies Lindenthal. 2013. “House Prices
and Fundamentals: 355 Years of Evidence.” J. Money, Credit, and Banking 45
(2–3): 477–91.
Andrei, Daniel, and Julien Cujean. 2013. “Information Percolation in Centralized Markets.” Manuscript, Anderson School Management, Univ. California,
Los Angeles.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing Puzzles.” J. Finance 59 (4): 1481–1509.
Barlevy, Gadi, and Jonas D. M. Fisher. 2010. “Mortgage Choices and Housing
Speculation.” Working Paper no. 2010-12, Fed. Reserve Bank Chicago.
Bernoulli, Daniel. 1766. “Essai d’une nouvelle analyse de la mortalité causée par
la petite vérole, et des avantages de l’inoculation pour la prévenir.” In Mémoires
de mathematique et de physique, 1–45. Paris: Academie Royale des Sciences.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Zoran Ivković, Paul A. Smith, and Scott Weisbenner. 2008.
“Neighbors Matter: Causal Community Effects and Stock Market Participation.” J. Finance 63 (3): 1509–31.
Case, Karl E., and Robert J. Shiller. 2010. “What Were They Thinking? Home
Buyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Working paper (May), Yale Univ.
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne K. Thompson. 2012. “What Have They
Been Thinking? Home Buyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings
Papers Econ. Activity 2012 (2): 265–98.
Chu, Yongqiang. 2014. “Credit Constraints, Inelastic Supply, and the Housing
Boom.” Rev. Econ. Dynamics 17 (1): 52–69.
Diba, Behzad T., and Herschel I. Grossman. 1987. “On the Inception of Rational
Bubbles.” Q. J.E. 102 (3): 697–700.
Dietz, Klaus, and J. A. P. Heesterbeek. 2002. “Daniel Bernoulli’s Epidemiological
Model Revisited.” Math. Biosciences 180 (1–2): 1–21.
Duffie, Darrell, Gaston Giroux, and Gustavo Manso. 2010. “Information Percolation.” American Econ. J.: Microeconomics 2 (1): 100–111.
Duffie, Darrell, and Yeneng Sun. 2007. “The Existence of Independent Random
Matching.” Ann. Appl. Probability 17 (1): 386–419.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement Plan: The Influence of Colleagues’ Choices.” J. Public Econ.
85 (1): 121–48.

1146

journal of political economy

Dumas, Bernard, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal. 2009. “Equilibrium
Portfolio Strategies in the Presence of Sentiment Risk and Excess Volatility.”
J. Finance 64 (2): 579–629.
Eitrheim, Øyvind, and Solveig K. Erlandsen. 2004. “House Price Indices for Norway 1819–2003.” In Historical Monetary Statistics for Norway, 1819 –2003, edited
by Øyvind Eitrheim, Jan T. Klovland, and Jan F. Qvigstad. Occasional Paper
no. 35/2004. Oslo: Norges Bank.
Geanakoplos, John. 2010. “The Leverage Cycle.” NBER Macroeconomics Ann.
24:1–66.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse Shapiro. 2011. “Ideological Segregation Online
and Offline.” Q. J.E. 126 (4): 1799–1839.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2006. “Housing Dynamics.” Working
Paper no. 12787, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Glaeser, Edward L., Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E. Saks. 2005. “Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up?” A.E.R. 95 (2): 329–33.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John Heaton, and Nan Li. 2008. “Consumption Strikes
Back? Measuring Long-Run Risk.” J.P.E. 116 (2): 260–302.
Harrison, J. Michael, and David M. Kreps. 1978. “Speculative Investor Behavior
in a Stock Market with Heterogeneous Expectations.” Q. J.E. 92 (2): 323–36.
Holmans, Alan. 1995. “Where Have All the First-Time Buyers Gone? Estimating
the First-Time Buyer Population in the United Kingdom.” Housing Finance
25 (February): 7–13.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2005. “Thy Neighbor’s
Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth Effects in the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers.” J. Finance 60 (6): 2801–24.
Kaustia, Markku, and Samuli Knüpfer. 2008. “Do Investors Overweight Personal
Experience? Evidence from IPO Subscriptions.” J. Finance 63 (6): 2679–2702.
Kelly, Morgan, and Cormac Ó Gráda. 2000. “Market Contagion: Evidence from
the Panics of 1854 and 1857.” A.E.R. 90 (5): 1110–24.
Kermack, William O., and Anderson G. McKendrick. 1927. “A Contribution to
the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics.” Proc. Royal Soc. London, Ser. A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 115 (772): 700–721.
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook. 2001. “Birds of a
Feather: Homophily in Social Networks.” Ann. Rev. Sociology 27:415–44.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. “The Market for News.” A.E.R.
95 (4): 1031–53.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider. 2009. “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Survey Evidence and a Search Model.” A.E.R. 99 (2): 406–11.
Price, Paul C., and Eric R. Stone. 2004. “Intuitive Evaluation of Likelihood Judgment Producers: Evidence for a Confidence Heuristic.” J. Behavioral Decision
Making 17 (1): 39 –57.
Quigley, John M., and Steven Raphael. 2005. “Regulation and the High Cost of
Housing.” A.E.R. 95 (2): 323–28.
Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Q. J.E.
125 (3): 1253–96.
Scheinkman, José A., and Wei Xiong. 2003. “Overconfidence and Speculative
Bubbles.” J.P.E. 111 (6): 1183–1219.
Sniezekf, Janet A., and Lyn M. Van Swol. 2001. “Trust, Confidence, and Expertise
in a Judge-Advisor System.” Org. Behavior and Human Decision Processes 84 (2):
288–307.
Stein, Jeremy. 1995. “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model
with Down-Payment Effects.” Q. J.E. 110 (2): 379–406.

booms and busts in housing markets

1147

Sunstein, Cass. 2001. Republic.com. Princeton NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette. 2003. “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’ Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions.”
NBER Macroeconomics Ann. 18:139–94.
Zeira, Joseph. 1999. “Informational Overshooting, Booms, and Crashes.” J. Monetary Econ. 43 (1): 237–57.

Copyright of Journal of Political Economy is the property of University of Chicago Press and
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

