Germs, Social Networks and Growth
Alessandra Fogli and Laura Veldkamp∗
April 22, 2019

Abstract
Does the pattern of social connections between individuals matter for macroeconomic outcomes? If so, where do differences in these patterns come from and how large are their effects?
Using network analysis tools, we explore how different social network structures affect technology diffusion and thereby a country’s rate of growth. The correlation between high-diffusion
networks and income is strongly positive. But when we use a model to isolate the effect of a
change in social networks on growth, the effect can be positive, negative, or zero. The reason is
that networks diffuse both ideas and disease. Low-diffusion networks have evolved in countries
where disease is prevalent because limited connectivity protects residents from epidemics. But
a low-diffusion network in a low-disease environment compromises the diffusion of good ideas.
In general, social networks have evolved to fit their economic and epidemiological environment.
Trying to change networks in one country to mimic those in a higher-income country may well
be counterproductive.

How does a country’s culture affect its income? Many papers in macroeconomics have tackled
this question by modeling various aspects of culture and measuring its economic consequences.1
This paper explores one aspect of a country’s culture: its pattern of social connections. Using tools
from network analysis, we explore how and to what extent different social network structures might
affect a country’s rate of technological progress. Our network model explains why societies might
adopt growth-inhibiting structures and allows us to quantify the effect of networks on income.
Measuring the speed of information or technology diffusion within various kinds of networks has
a long history(Granovetter, 2005). To measure the macroeconomic effects of networks, we could take
∗

Corresponding author: afogli00@gmail.com, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 90 Hennepin Ave., Minneapolis, MN 55405. lv2405@columbia.edu, Columbia University, Graduate School of Business, 3022 Broadway, New York,
NY 10027. We thank participants at the Minnesota Workshop in Macroeconomic Theory, NBER EF&G meetings,
SED meetings, the Conference on the Economics of Interactions and Culture and Einaudi Institute, the Munich conference on Cultural Change and Economic Growth, SITE, NBER Macro across Time and Space, and NBER growth
meetings and seminar participants at Bocconi, Brown, USC, Stanford, Chicago, Western Ontario, Minnesota, Penn
State, George Washington, and NYU for their comments and suggestions. We thank Corey Fincher and Damian
Murray for help with the pathogen data, Diego Comin, Pascaline Dupas, Chad Jones, and Marti Mestieri for useful
comments, and Isaac Baley, Callum Jones, Hyunju Lee, David Low, Amanda Michaud, and Arnav Sood for invaluable
research assistance. Laura Veldkamp thanks the Hoover Institution for its hospitality and financial support through
the National Fellows Program. Keywords: growth, development, technology diffusion, economic networks, social
networks, pathogens, disease. JEL codes: E02, O1, O33, I1.
1
See, for example, Bisin and Verdier (2001), Tertilt (2005), Doepke and Tertilt (2009), Greenwood and Guner
(2010), or Doepke and Zilibotti (2014) for a literature review.

1

a simple production economy, embed within it fast-diffusion and slow-diffusion networks, calibrate
it, and measure the difference in output growth. This simple measurement exercise faces two key
challenges. The first challenge is determining what network to use for a whole country. Although
researchers have mapped complete social networks in schools or online communities, mapping the
exact social network structure for a large cross section of countries is not feasible. Instead, we
propose three aggregate features of networks that regulate the network’s diffusion speed and have
measurable counterparts in cross-country data. We then measure a country’s social network by
rating the network along those three dimensions. The second challenge is that there are multiple
channels of endogeneity: First, income affects social network structure. Second, networks have long
been known to affect disease transmission, which in turn affects productivity and income. Finally,
technology diffusion reduces disease prevalence, and lower death rates alter how social networks
evolve. All of these channels compromise the direct measurement of social networks’ effects. In
response, we build a model incorporating each of these various sources of endogeneity. Then we
calibrate the model, assess its performance with overidentifying moments, and use the model to
measure the effect of the network alone.
Our theory for how networks evolve endogenously revolves around the idea that communicable diseases and technologies spread in similar ways – through human contact. We explore an
evolutionary model in which networks that are stable, local, and have fewer connections reduce
the risk of infection, allowing the participants to live longer. But such low-diffusion networks also
restrict the group’s exposure to new technologies. In countries where communicable diseases are
inherently more prevalent, the high risk of infection makes nodes with many, unstable, or distant
linkages more likely to die out. A network that inhibits the spread of disease and technology will
emerge. In countries where communicable diseases are less prevalent, nodes with few, stable, and
local connections will be less economically and reproductively successful and will die off in the long
run.
Section 1 begins by building an evolutionary model of social networks where the networks
govern disease and technology diffusion, but diseases and technology also govern network evolution.
Section 2 proves theoretical results about the effect of each network feature on technology and
disease diffusion. It also explores the reverse effects: how technology and disease affect the types
of networks that emerge. Specifically, disease prevalence creates the conditions that are conducive
to growth-inhibiting networks. Section 3 describes our measures of pathogen prevalence, social
networks, and technology diffusion and how we use them to calibrate the model. Section 4 then
uses the calibrated model to investigate how much an exogenous change in network structure would
affect technology and output, and explores why this answer depends on the country. Finally, we
estimate the effect of social networks on technology diffusion in the data, using the difference in

2

communicable and noncommunicable diseases as an instrument. Since diseases spread by humans
are systematically more likely to infect people who are more central to their social network, humanto-human diseases are widely thought to affect the evolution of social networks, more than other
diseases do. The model and data agree that changes in the social network can raise a country’s
productivity and output growth by 50-100%. But when applied to an economy with high disease
prevalence, the same change can undermine output by propagating disease.
Related Literature

The paper contributes to four growing literatures. Primarily, the paper is

about a technology diffusion process. It is perhaps most closely related to economic history work by
de la Croix et al. (2017) on the role that guilds and extended families played in technology diffusion
in preindustrial economies. Recent work by Lucas and Moll (2014) and Perla and Tonetti (2011)
uses a search model framework in which every agent who searches is equally likely to encounter
any other agent and acquire the agent’s technology. Greenwood et al. (2005) model innovations
that are known to all but are adopted when the user’s income becomes sufficiently high. In Comin
et al. (2013), innovations diffuse spatially. What sets our paper apart is its assumption that agents
encounter only those in their own network. Our main results all arise from this focus on the network
topology. Many recent papers use networks to represent the input/output structure of the economy
instead of social connections.2 Our focus on social networks creates new measurement challenges
and leads us to examine different forms of networks. For example, Oberfield (2013) models firms
that optimally choose a single firm to connect to, which is appropriate for his question but precludes
thinking about the network features we examine.
The paper also contributes to the literature on culture and its macroeconomic effects (e.g., Bisin
and Verdier (2001), Greenwood and Guner (2010), or Doepke and Tertilt (2009)). Gorodnichenko
and Roland (2017) focus on the psychological or preference aspects of collectivism, one of the
four network measures we use as well. They use collectivism to proxy for individuals’ innovation
preferences and consider the effects of these preferences on income. In contrast, we use collectivism
as one of many dimensions of a social network and assess the effect of those relationships on
the speed of technology diffusion. Similarly, most work on culture and macroeconomics regards
culture as an aspect of preferences.3 Greif (1994) argues that preferences and social networks are
intertwined because culture is an important determinant of a society’s network structure. Although
this may be true, we examine a different determinant of networks – pathogen prevalence – that
is easily measurable for an entire country. Our evolutionary-sociological approach lends itself to
quantifying the aggregate effects of social networks on economic outcomes.
2

See, for example, Chaney (2014) or Kelley et al. (2013).
See, for example, Tabellini (2010) and Algan and Cahuc (2007). Brock and Durlauf (2006) review work on social
influence in macroeconomics but bemoan the lack of work that incorporates social network interactions.
3

3

Our empirical methodology clearly draws much of its inspiration from work on the role of
political institutions by Acemoglu et al. (2002), Acemoglu and Johnson (2005) and the role of social
infrastructure by Hall and Jones (1999). But instead of examining institutions or infrastructure,
which are not about the pattern of social connections between individuals, we study an equally
important but distinct type of social organization, the social network structure.
There is a micro literature that considers the effects of social networks on economic outcomes
(e.g., see Granovetter, 2005; Rauch and Casella, 2001). In contrast, this paper takes a more macro
approach and studies the types of social networks that are adopted throughout a country’s economy
and how those networks affect technology diffusion economy-wide. Ashraf and Galor (2012) and
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) also take a macro perspective but measure social distance with
genetic distance. Our network theory and findings complement this work by offering an endogenous
mechanism to explain the origins of social distance and why it might be related to the diffusion of
new ideas.
Finally, many papers argue that disease prevalence is growth inhibiting.4 To this discussion, our
paper adds a new, social-networks-based channel through which health affects economic outcomes.

1

A Network Diffusion Model

The model is a framework for measurement, which allows us to quantify the effect of networks on
growth. While our model is surely simpler than reality, our quantitative exercises give us a sense
of the order of magnitude of the macroeconomic effect. The concept of social network structure
is a fungible one. We pick particular aspects of networks on which to anchor our analysis. In
doing this, we do not exclude the possibility that other aspects of social or cultural institutions
are important for technology diffusion and income. We focus on dimensions we can measure. The
model teaches us about how three different aspects of social networks facilitate technology diffusion.
It also explains why disease that spreads from human to human might influence a society’s social
network in a persistent way.
A key feature of our model linking social networks to technological progress is that technologies
are spread by human contact. This feature is not obvious, since new ideas could be spread by
print or electronic media. However, Ryan and Gross (1943) first established the importance of
social contacts in the spread of technology. Since then, a large literature in sociology and consumer
research, starting with Rogers (1976), equates a diffusion model with innovations that spread
4

Bloom et al. (2004) summarize this literature, which typically uses aggregate economic data and aggregate health
data, as well as standard controls, and estimates that a one-year increase in life expectancy raises output by 4%.
In contrast, other authors such as Weil (2007) use micro-evidence of health effects on individual output and then
simulate the implied aggregate effect on GDP.

4

through a social system.5 In his 1969 American Economic Association presidential address, Kenneth
Arrow remarked,
While mass media play a major role in alerting individuals to the possibility of an innovation, it seems to be personal contact that is most relevant in leading to its adoption.
Thus, the diffusion of an innovation becomes a process formally akin to the spread of
an infectious disease. (Arrow, 1969, p. 33)
While the idea that certain network properties facilitate information diffusion is well known,
the origin of such social networks is less-explored territory. Since a key problem with determining
the economic effect of social networks in the data is the endogeneity of networks, it is important
for our model to have endogenous social networks as well. Therefore, a second key feature of our
model is an evolutionary process for social networks, in which economically successful agents pass
on their pattern of social connections. This evolutionary model also explains why growth-inhibiting
social networks emerge in response to disease. The idea that social circles might evolve based on
disease avoidance is based on economic and biological evidence (Birchenall, 2014).6 Motivated by
this evidence, we propose the following model.

1.1

Economic Environment

Time, denoted by t = {1, . . . , T }, is discrete and finite. At any given time t, there are J agents,
indexed by their location j{1, 2, . . . , J} on a circle. Agents have social connections that we describe
with a network.
Social Networks

Each person i is socially connected to others. If two people have a social

network connection, we call them “friends.” Friends could also be family, coworkers or any pair
of people with close and repeated social contact. Let ηjk = ηkj = 1 if person j and person k are
friends and = 0 otherwise. To capture the idea that a person cannot self-infect in the following
period, we set all diagonal elements (ηjj ) to zero. Let the symmetric network of all connections be
denoted N .
5

In economics, Foster and Rosenzweig (1995) spawned a branch of the growth and development literatures that
focuses on the role of personal contact in technology diffusion; see Conley and Udry (2010) or Young (2009) for a
review.
6
Animal behavior researchers have long known that many species form social connections that depend on the
group’s health status (Hamilton and Zuk, 1982). For primates in particular, mating strategies, group sizes, social
avoidance, and barriers between groups are all influenced by the presence of socially transmissible pathogens (Loehle,
1995). Thornhill et al. (2010) document this effect in human societies. An alternative to the evolutionary approach
would be to work with a network choice model. But equilibria in such models often do not exist, and when they do,
they are typically not unique.

5

In a large economy, it is not possible to measure the complete pattern of linkages between every
agent. Instead, we categorize agents, or nodes, into types whose linkages follow particular patterns.
This approach allows us to characterize a large, aggregate network by its fraction of nodes of each
type. This characterization enables comparisons with survey data that will enable us to measure
the properties of social networks across countries.
At each date t, each person j has a type τj (t). That type is a three-dimensional state. The
three dimensions to node type are: a binary collectivist type θj , a degree type nf j , and a mobility
type mj , where nf j and mj come from a discrete, finite set of possible types. Note that node type
does not include technology.
When we think about node types governing social connections, we are faced with an inevitable
dilemma: What happens if i’s type dictates that he should be friends with j, but j should not
be friends with i? To resolve this impasse, we assume that each agent’s type dictates her links in
one direction but not the other. This dilemma is a product of the fact that social connections are
inherently bidirectional. To break this impasse, we define node types by the patterns of links that
nodes form to one side (their left, if we order nodes clockwise). These definitions do not rule out
other links. In fact, every node will have additional links on the other side. But the nature of those
(right-side) links is governed by other nodes’ types.
We explore three aspects of social networks because they are important determinants of diffusion
speed and we have cross-country data measuring them. Of course, this means that we hold fixed
many other aspects of networks that may also differ across countries. Measuring these other aspects
of social networks and understanding their effects on economic growth would be useful topics for
further research.
Network Feature 1: Degree. The degree of a node is the number of connections that node
has to other nodes. In the context of a social network, degree is the number of friends a person
has. In our model, the degree type of a node regulates the number of links it has on one side.
Definition 1 If agent j has degree nf j (even), he is connected to nf j /2 other nodes to his left.
The number of links one creates on one side is given by the degree divided by two because that
ensures that if every node has degree-type nf , every node is connected to nf others.
Network Feature 2: Collectivism / Individualism. Collectivism and its opposite, individualism, define a feature of social networks that has been studied extensively by sociologists.
Mutual friendships and interdependence are hallmarks of collectivist societies. Individualists have
friendships, but those friends are less likely to know one another. To measure collectivism, we can
ask: If i is friends with j and with k, how often are j and k also friends? We refer to a structure
in which i, j, and k are all connected to each other as a collective.

6

A measure of the extent of shared friendships, and thus the degree of collectivism, is the number
of such collectives. The number of collectives is related to a common measure of network clustering:
divide the number of collectives by the number of possible collectives in the network to get the
overall clustering measure (Jackson, 2008). A fully collectivist network is illustrated in Figure 1.
Definition 2 If agent j is collectivist (which we denote by θj = 1), then he is connected to the
nf j /2 closest nodes to his left: ηjk = 1 for k = {j + 1, . . . , j + nf j /2}, modulus the size of the
network.
All nodes are connected to their immediate neighbors. This is what constitutes a neighbor in this
model. The modulus phrase in the definition simply means that, for example, if j + nf /2 = N + 1,
then since there is no N + 1st node, the link simply wraps around the other side of the circle and
connects with node 1. Therefore, when a node j is connected to j + 1 and j + 2, that will always
form a collective, since those neighbors are always themselves connected. Thus, collectivist nodes
are ones whose ties complete a collective. The opposite of collectivist is individualist: A node that
is individualist is connected to some nodes that are not themselves connected.
Definition 3 If agent j is an individualist (not collectivist: θj = 0) with degree nf , then she is
connected to the closest node j + 1 and nf j /2 − 1 nodes that are all at least ∆j > 2 spaces away:
ηjk = 1 for k = {j + 1, j + ∆j , . . . , (j + ∆j + nf /2 − 2)}, modulus the size of the network.
Let θ̄ ≡

R

θi di denote the fraction of collectivists in a network.

Network Feature 3: Mobility The third network feature we introduce is shortcut links that
span the network. These long links represent the long-distance social ties that arise when some
agents in a society are mobile. Their frequent travels bring them in close social contact with others
who are not in their social neighborhood. We model this as a small probability of a long link to a
randomly chosen node in the network.
Definition 4 If an agent j has mobility mj , then with probability mj , one of j’s existing links is
broken and reassigned to any other node with which j is unconnected, with equal probability. This
long link endures until the next social change shock arrives.
This type of ring network, with random long links, is a small-world network (Watts and Strogatz,
1998). Sociologists frequently use small-world networks as an approximation to large social networks
because of their high degree of collectivism and small average path length, both pervasive features
of real social networks.
These are the three network features that we will map to data to assess the economic importance of social networks. A node can be any combination of the three features. However, some
7

combinations do create tension. When we construct the network, we first construct collectivist
or individualist links with the right degree. Then, we randomly draw mobility shocks and rewire
some social linkages. A mobile node may end up connecting with a low-degree or collectivist node
that now has additional long links. These random connections do not change the type of the node
connected to. They do highlight that our categorizations of social relationships are only aggregate
and approximate characteristics of the network.
Technology and Output Each agent produces output with a technology Aj (t):
yj (t) = Aj (t).
Technological progress occurs when someone improves on an existing technology. To make this improvement, the person needs to know about the existing technology. Thus, if a person is producing
with technology Aj (t), she will invent the next technology with an i.i.d. probability λt each period.
If she invents the new technology, ln(Aj (t + 1)) = ln(Aj (t)) + δ. In other words, a new invention
results in a (δ · 100)% increase in productivity.
People can also learn from others in their network. If person j is friends with person k and
Ak (t) > Aj (t), then with an i.i.d. probability φ, j can produce with k’s technology in the following
period: Aj (t + 1) = Ak (t). With multiple friends, each offers an independent chance of technology
transmission. If multiple new technologies are transmitted to the same node, the best technology
is adopted.
Network Evolution A node has an opportunity to change type when a social change shock
arrives. This shock, ξj (t) ∈ {0, 1}, is drawn independently across individuals and time. The social
change probability pξ is the probability that ξj (t) = 1. When ξj (t) = 1, the agent at node j adopts
the type of the most successful node that j is connected to. In other words, if the person at node
j is socially connected to nodes {k : ηjk (t) = 1} and gets hit with a social change shock at time
t, then at time t + 1 he adopts the type of k ∗ = argmax{k:ηjk (t)=1} Ak (t) (i.e., the friend with the
highest time-t technology). Then the time-(t + 1) type of person j is the same as the time-t type
of person k ∗ : τj (t + 1) = τk∗ (t).7 Whether or not one’s type changes, when social change arrives
(ξj (t) = 1), agent j takes a new, independent draw of social mobility. Whether they have a long
link and which node that link connects them to can change.
The idea behind this process is that more successful types are passed on more frequently.
7

Another logical specification for the social change shock is to link it to disease, so that someone who gets sick
dies and then is reborn with, potentially, a different type. The problem with this formulation of the model is that
epidemics prompt rapid social change. Since this is counterfactual, our model makes social change independent of
disease.

8

Evolutionary models often have this feature. At the same time, we want to retain the networkbased idea that one’s traits are shaped by one’s community. Therefore, in our model, the process by
which one inherits types is shaped by one’s community, by the social network, and by the relative
success (relative income) of the people in that local community.
A social change shock does not alter the technology diffusion process. It only changes the
network, which affects technology diffusion indirectly.
Disease, Death, and Renewal

Each infected person transmits the disease to each of his friends

with probability πt . The transmission to each friend is an independent event. Thus, if ṅd friends
are diseased at time t − 1, the probability of being healthy at time t is (1 − πt )ṅd . If no friends have
a disease at time t − 1, then the probability of contracting the disease at time t is zero.
Let dj (t) = 1 if the person in location j acquires a transmittable disease (is sick) in period t
and = 0 otherwise. An agent j who acquires a disease is sick and loses the ability to produce for
the remainder of her life span (Aj (s) = 0, ∀s[t, tr ]). The date at which life ends and a new node
appears tr is governed by the social change shock ξj (t). When social change shock hits (ξj (t) = 1),
the agent j is replaced by a new, healthy person in the same location j. Just like when a healthy
node is renewed, the new agent j inherits the technology and network type of the most productive
node that the parent was connected to.
We link the rebirth and social change process because social change only propagates when it
affects productive nodes that can pass on their technology and type to others. Therefore, when we
allow a node to adjust its type, we also cure it of disease if it is sick. It is as if the node dies and
is reborn, healthy, with a type dictated by its community. This assumption facilitates the process
of social change.
Feedbacks between Disease and Technology The challenge in measuring the effect of networks on income is endogeneity. Diseases affect not only networks but also technological innovation.
Similarly, technology, which obviously raises income, also helps to eradicate disease, which in turn,
influences social networks. Therefore, we build these effects into our model, calibrate them, and
then account for them when we do model experiments that gauge the effect of a change in a social
network.
Feedback 1 (Innovation): The rate of technological innovation depends on disease prevalence.
The time-varying probability of innovation is
¯
λt = 2λ0 (1 − Φ(d(t)/κ
T )),

(1)

where κT is the parameter for the technology feedback elasticity, Φ is a standard normal cumulative
9

¯ ≡ 1/n
density and d(t)

P

j

dj (t) (recall that dj (t) = 1 if agent j is infected at time t and 0 otherwise).

This captures the idea that having a large number of infected people in a society is not conducive
to innovation.
Feedback 2 (Infection): The probability of disease transmission depends on the aggregate
P
technology level, which is defined as A(t) ≡ 1/n j Aj (t). The endogenous disease transmission
probability is
πt = 2π0 (1 − Φ(A(t)/κG )),

(2)

where κG is the parameter for the germs feedback elasticity. This captures the idea that as technology improves, public health innovations, vaccines, and medical advances make new infections
less likely.

2

Theoretical Results

Before using the model to measure network effects, we briefly explain the model’s basic properties.
We begin by exploring how each network characteristic affects a network summary statistic known
as average path length, and how that path length is related to both the expected time to infection
and the expected rate of technological progress. These results formally break down the logic for
why some types of social networks can increase aggregate income. We then explore the long-run
convergence of networks. The proofs of all results are in Online Appendix A.

2.1

Diffusion Speed, Infections, and Innovations

We begin with a definition of average path length. Average path length is the average number of
steps along the shortest paths for all possible pairs of network nodes. Let pij represent the shortest
path length between nodes i and j and N = {1, . . . , J} represent the set of J nodes. Then,
1X
Average path length =
J
i∈N

P

j∈N /i pij

J −1

.

(3)

Average path length is important because it governs the mean infection time from a disease and
the mean discovery time for a new technological innovation. Let L̄ be the average healthy lifetime
of an agent in network N (specifically, it is the number of consecutive healthy periods of a node j).
Similarly, let ᾱ be the average number of periods it takes for a new idea to reach a given agent in
network N . We call ᾱ the average adoption lag.
Result 1 If π = 1 and

P

j

dj (0) = 1, then the average healthy lifetime L̄(N ) is monotonically

increasing in the average path length of the network.
10

If φ = 1, then the average technology adoption lag ᾱ(N ) is monotonically increasing in the average
path length of a network.
Of course, diffusion is not the same as innovation. Diffusion accelerates technology growth
because when idea diffusion is faster, redundant innovations are less frequent. Thus, more of the
innovations end up advancing the technological frontier.
Next, we explore how the three characteristics of nodes in our network regulate the average
path length of the network. The next result shows that higher degree, individualism, and greater
mobility all have the effect of reducing path lengths, on average.
Result 2 The following network features reduce the average path length of the network:
1. Higher degree: The average path length in a ring network is a decreasing function of nf .
2. Individualism: θj = 1, ∀j is a network with a longer path length than θj = 0, ∀j, for a given
¯
degree, no mobility, and a network of size J > J.
3. Greater mobility: The expected average path length of the network is a decreasing function of
the mobility probability mj ∀j .
A social network with a higher degree has a lower average path length. With more connections,
it requires fewer steps to reach other nodes.
For individualism, the logic is slightly different. Disease and technology spread more slowly
in the collectivist network because each contiguous group of friends is connected to, at most, four
nongroup members. Those are the two people adjacent to the group, on either side. Since there are
few links with outsiders, the probability that a disease within the group is passed to someone outside
the group is small. Likewise, ideas disseminate slowly. Something invented in one location takes a
long time to travel to a faraway location. In the meantime, someone else may have reinvented the
same technology level, rather than building on existing knowledge and advancing technology to the
next level. Such redundant innovations slow the rate of technological progress and lower average
consumption.
Figure 1 illustrates the smaller path length and faster diffusion process in a purely individualist
network, compared with a purely collectivist one, where both networks have degree 4 and no
mobility. In this simple case, in which the probability of transmission is 1, each frame shows
the transmission of an idea or a disease introduced to one node at time 0. The “infected” person
transmits that technology to all the individuals to whom she is connected. In period 1, 4 new people
use the new technology, in both networks. But by period 2, 9 people are using the technology in
the collectivist network and 12 are using it in the individualist network. In each case, an adopter
11

Figure 1: Slower diffusion in the collectivist network (θj = 0∀j, top) than in the individualist
network (θj = 1∀j, bottom). Black dots represent nodes that have acquired a new technology that
was discovered by the top node.
Collectivist Network

t=0

t=1

t=2

Individualist Network

t=0

t=1

t=2

of the technology transmits the technology to 4 others each period. But in the collectivist network,
many of those 4 people already have the technology. The technology transmission is redundant, so
diffusion is slowed.8
For mobility, a greater probability of forming long links (higher mobility) is similar to the
8

What if technology diffusion is not a process “formally akin to the spread of an infectious disease”(Arrow, 1969).
Instead, a technology is adopted only when a person comes in contact with multiple other adopters. This idea is
called “complex contagion.” While Centola and Macy (2007) demonstrate that collectives can theoretically facilitate
technology adoption, they admit, “We know of no empirical studies that have directly tested the need for wide bridges
[collectives] in the spread of complex contagions.” In other words, the theoretical possibility lacks empirical support.
In contrast, the idea that technology is adopted when information about the success of the technology arrives from a
single social contact is a well-documented phenomenon (see, e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995; Munshi, 2004; Conley
and Udry, 2010).

12

individualist’s long links. It decreases the average path length between nodes that would have
otherwise been far apart. All the results in this section are about symmetric networks simply
because there are too many possible asymmetric networks to consider them all. However, the
results in Table 2 show how each of these network features speeds diffusion, even in a network that
is asymmetric.
Taken together, these results explain why ideas and germs spread more quickly in low-pathlength networks, why fast diffusion might imply faster technological progress and output growth,
and what evolutionary advantages each type of network might offer its adopters.

2.2

Understanding Network Evolution

Why do some societies end up with networks that inhibit growth? If disease prevalence can permanently alter social structure, then diseases that were prevalent long ago may have created networks
that are no longer ideal. This rationalizes differences in social structures that persist even after
diseases have been eliminated. It also motivates our use of historical disease data, in the next
section. The first result shows that eventually, the economy always converges to a uniform-type
network.
Result 3 Networks converge to a uniform type: With probability 1, the network becomes
homogeneous: ∃T s.t. τj (t) = τk (t) ∀k and ∀t > T .
In other words, after some finite date T , everyone will have the same type forever after. They
might all be individualist or all be collectivist. But everyone will be the same. Traits are inherited
from neighbors, so when a trait dies out, it never returns. The state in which all individuals have
the same trait is an absorbing state. The result relies on there being a finite network and a finite
type space.
Similarly, having zero infected people is an absorbing state. Since that state is always reachable
from any other state with positive probability, it is the unique steady state.9
Result 4 Disease dies out: With probability 1, ∃T s.t. dj (t) = 0 ∀j and ∀t > T .
These results show us that which network type will prevail is largely dependent on which dies
out first: the disease-prone trait (individualism, high degree, mobility) or the disease. If disease is
very prevalent, it kills off all disease-prone types. The society is left with a disease-resistant but
9

Epidemiological models with an infinite number of agents often have a second steady state with a positive
infection rate. For example, in Goenka and Liu (2015), any positive fraction of infected agents is still an infinite
number of infections. Since the probability that none of the infinite infections is passed on to another node is zero,
the infinite-agent model never reaches extinction. Our model predicts extinction because we have a finite number of
agents.

13

diffusion-inhibiting network forever after. If disease is not very prevalent, its transmission rate is
low, or by good luck it just dies out quickly, then the disease-prone will survive. Since they are more
economically successful, the economy is more likely to converge to a disease-prone, high-diffusion
network. The key consequence is that networks can persist long after the conditions to which they
were adapted have changed.

3

Data, Measurement, and Calibration

After providing a qualitative analysis of the forces at work in the model, we bring the model to
the data and use it to quantify the macroeconomic effects of social networks. We will do this by
simulating economies with different initial disease prevalence. This gives rise to different social
networks and economic outcomes. This laboratory will allow us to disentangle the network effects,
feedback effects, and the direct effect of health on output.
Quantifying the model involves assembling an assortment of data that includes pathogen prevalence, social networks, and technology diffusion. We assembled a data set that contains each of
these variables for 71 countries. For calibration purposes, we use mostly data from the U.S. because
that is our benchmark economy, from which we explore parameter deviations. We explore alternative parameterizations in Online Appendix B. The full data set is featured in Section 5, where an
instrumental variables estimation supports the model’s predictions.
Mapping Network Data to Model Variables We calibrate the model parameters to replicate
features of the US economy. The United States is characterized by low disease prevalence and fast
diffusion networks. Network degree (nf ) and mobility (mj ) allow the model to match the modal
number of friends and the probability of moving. To keep the number of node types limited,
we allow a person to be either high or low degree (nf = {4, 6}) and either high or low mobility
(probability of forming new links mj = {0, 0.1}). We choose these high and low values because they
straddle the variation in our data. Each node is linked to its immediate neighbors by definition.
Because nf is an even number, the minimum number of degree that differentiates collectivists and
individualists is 4. On the other hand, the maximum number of degree in the GSS data set for the
United States is 6.
The spirit of the exercise is to simulate an economy that starts with a small fraction of highdiffusion network types. In different epidemiological environments, we calibrate the parameters to
match a low-disease economy and generate time series for networks, output, and technology over 500
periods. We then change the initial disease prevalence, and compare the economic outcomes with
the benchmark economy of low disease. We use the United States as our benchmark economy and

14

set the initial fraction of individualist (long-link type) to 30%.10 We use the same initial fraction
for the high mobility type. Since in the General Social Survey, the annual interstate migration rate
in the United States in 2000 is 3%, we set the high-mobility type to have a probability of moving
equal to 10%. The migration rate informs our choice of the high-mobility value and the fraction of
high-mobility types.
The length ∆j of the individualists’ long link governs the average path length in an individualist
network. Seminal research done by Travers and Milgram (1969) on average US social network path
length found that a letter dropped in the middle of the United States typically found its recipient
after being passed on five to six times. Thus, we set ∆j so that, after may periods, when disease is
extinct and high-diffusion nodes dominate, that “recent” U.S. network looks like recent data. The
average length of the path between any two nodes in that network is 5.1.
Mapping Data to Disease Parameters For the initial disease prevalence rate (dh (0)), we
set the low germs pervalence to 0.05% since in the United States, infectious diseases have been
almost entirely eradicated.11 In our experiment, we set the high disease prevalence to 18%, which
matches the malaria prevalence in Ghana in 2006.12
To calibrate the probability of disease transmission (π), a natural target is the steady state rate
of infection. But, as we have shown, the only steady state infection rate is zero. Therefore, we set
the transmission rate so that, on average, the disease disappears in 150 years in the high germs
economy (Ghana).
Finally, our social change probability pξ regulates the rate of network evolution. When we
calibrate pξ to 0.2, it means that on average, a social change shock arrives once every 5 years.
Although the node can change type every 5 years, most of the time, the highest-productivity node
among one’s friends has the same type, so no change of type occurs. This pξ value is set such that
each generation (25 years), 5% of the population changes type.
Calibrating Technology Diffusion Parameters We use technology measures derived from
the cross-country historical adoption of the technology data set developed by (Comin and Hobijn,
2010a). The data cover the diffusion of about 115 technologies in over 150 countries during the last
200 years. There are two margins of technology adoption: the extensive margin (whether or not
a technology is adopted at all) and the intensive margin (how quickly a technology diffuses, given
10

This fraction should be small enough to leave room for endogenous diffusion of individualists. But at the same
time, it needs to be large enough so that the individualists survive initial disease prevalence.
11
From Mali et al. (2008), in 2006 malaria cases were 1,564 and from the US Census (U.S. Census Bureau (2006)),
the population was 294 million. This gives a malaria prevalance of 0.0005%.
12
We chose Ghana because this was one of the highest disease prevalences in our data. According to the Ghana
Health Service (Ghana Health Service (2008)), in 2006 there were 3.9 million malaria cases in Ghana. With a
population of 21.9 million in the same year, this gives a malaria prevalence of 18%.

15

that it is adopted). If the technology was introduced to the country late, a country can be behind
in a technology even though it is adopting it quickly.
To calibrate our model, we use the extensive measure, called the adoption lag. (Comin and
Hobijn, 2010a) define country x’s adoption lag to be the number of years in between invention and
the date when the first adopter in country x adopts the technology. We average over the various
technologies to arrive at the country’s average adoption lag.
Every node/person starts with a technology level of 0. Each period, any given person may
discover a new technology that raises his productivity with probability λ. The rate of arrival (λ)
is calibrated so that the average time between advances in the technology frontier is 21 years.
The magnitude of the increase in productivity from adopting a new technology (δ) is calibrated
to match the US GDP growth rate of 2.6% per year. The probability of transmitting a new
technology to each friend (φ) is chosen to match the fact that for the average household technology,
the time between invention and diffusion to half of the population is 40.18 years (Greenwood et al.,
2005).13
Disease-technology feedbacks. Section 1.1 introduced two feedback effects: an endogenous innovation rate that falls as the infection rate rises and an endogenous disease infection probability that
falls as technology improves. Each of these feedbacks introduces one new parameter to calibrate.
For endogenous innovation, we choose the parameter κT = 5.56 (from equation (1)) to match the
average difference in adoption lags between the United States and Ghana, which is 32 years. The
new parameter that governs endogenous infection rates κG = 400 (from equation (2)) targets a
complete extinction of germs in all US simulations. Notice that the innovation probability evolves
as a function of disease prevalence, and when the germs are completely eradicated, it is equal to
the US innovation probability (λ0 ). Given the disease prevalence in Ghana, this implies an initial
value of innovation probability of 0.03%, which evolves over time as the germs disappear. In the
low-disease economy, the United States, the disease transmission probability (π) starts at 5% and
decreases faster, because productivity increases more rapidly. At the end of the simulation period,
the germs transmission probability approaches close to 0.
These parameters are summarized in Table 1.

4

Main Results: How Do Networks Affect Income?

Our objective is to better understand how social networks affect technology diffusion and economic
development. The difficulty is that economic development also changes social network structures,
13
We calculate this half-diffusion from the Greenwood et al. (2005) data set by averaging the number of years from
introduction until a 50% adoption rate for 13 of their 15 technologies. We exclude the vacuum and washer because
their adoption rates were more than 30% in the year they first appeared in the data.

16

Table 1: Calibrated Model Parameters
Description

Parameter

Value

Degree, low

nf (L)

4

Degree, high
Mobility, low
Mobility, high
Disease transmission probability
Innovation productivity increase
Technology transfer probability

nf (H)
mj (L)
mj (H)
π0

6
0
0.1
5%

δ

80

φ

12%

Number of nodes to furthest
friend of an individualist

∆

7

Technology arrival rate

λ0

0.08%

Social change probability

pξ

20%

Tech feedback

κT

5.56

Germs feedback

κG

400

Target (Data)
General
(GSS)

Social

Model Moments
Survey

Interstate migration rates
Disease disappears in 150
years
2.6% growth rate in low
germ country
Half-diffusion in 40.18 years
(Greenwood et al. 2005) in
low germ
Average path length of 5
(Travers and Milgram 1969)
in U.S.
US technology adoption lag
of 21 years (Comin and Hobijn, 2010b), low germ
5% population type change
every 25 years, low germ
difference of adoption lag 32
years
Disease disappears in all
low-germs simulations (0
survival of germs)

142
3.0%
42.35

5.1

21.5

8.7%
34
0

Initial conditions for endogenous variables:
Fraction of individualist
fi
30%
Fraction of high degree
fd
20%
Fraction of high mobility
fm
70%
both directly and through disease prevalence. Using the quantified model, we can separate these
two effects by exogenously changing the network structure and observing the predicted effect on
technology diffusion and output. To do this, we proceed in three stages. First, we look at the modelimplied correlations between networks and income/productivity measures. This tells us how much
variation in cross-country income our model, with all its mechanisms, can generate. Second, we use
the model to isolate the network effect. Holding all other features fixed, we compare outcomes of
an economy in a high-diffusion social network with those from a low-diffusion social network. The
main finding is that, while high-diffusion social networks are a strong statistical predictor of output,

17

this does not imply that changing a country’s social structure will boost incomes. If a country’s
social network is low-diffusion, replacing it with a higher-diffusion pattern of social connection can
impoverish the country. Third, we explore why the effect of network changes depends on disease
prevalence. If a country has a low-diffusion network, that network evolved in order to protect the
country from disease epidemics. Replacing the low-diffusion network with a high-diffusion one can
be disastrous for the economy and the residents because the new network is maladapted to their
environment.

4.1

The Covariance between Networks and Income

How much of the variation in income can differences in disease and networks jointly explain? Here,
we show that the forces of the model can jointly explain large differences in income across countries.
Of course, just as in the data, the model’s networks are endogenous. This result does not imply
that changing networks alone can produce this variation in cross-country income. The causal effect
comes in the next subsection.
To explore the relationship between networks and income, the model needs some variation in
networks. But networks are endogenous outcomes of different disease environments (and random
chance). Therefore, we construct a set of economies with different initial disease prevalence, simulate
them, and measure the network and incomes at the end of the simulation. Each initial disease level
is meant to represent a different country that evolved to have a different social network. Specifically,
we consider 10 equally spaced levels of initial disease prevalence between 0.05% and 18%. These
end points correspond to the highest and lowest levels of prevalence of the diseases in our data.
For each initial level of disease, we run 200 simulations, where each simulation is computed on
a 400-person network, over 500 periods. At the end of the 500 periods, we use the fraction of
individualists, high-degree, and high-mobility nodes to construct the network index (defined in (4),
using weights from model output). Figure 2 shows that a 0.1-standard-deviation change in the
network index (0.15 points) correlates with a 0.25 log point (25%) higher end-of-simulation income.
Network Index :

^
^ + ω3 · M^
Ñ = ω1 · Individualism
+ ω2 · Degree
obility,

(4)

where x̃ ≡ (x − mean(x))/std(x) and {ω1 , ω2 , ω3 } are the PCA weights.
In large part, networks and income are correlated simply because both are correlated with
disease. At the same time, this correlation is a useful starting point because the real world also
has joint and reverse causality. It makes clear that, later, the difference in the causal results arises
not simply because the model differs from the real world. The causal results and correlations differ
greatly even inside the model. The model is valuable, in part, because it explains why the true

18

Figure 2: Networks and Income: Covariance. The graph reports the end-of-simulation income against
the end-of-simulation network index. The points on the left of the x-axis come from a high-disease economy that
starts with a maximum disease prevalence of 18% and evolves to have low-diffusion networks (low network index). The
points on the right come from low-disease economies (minimum is 0.05% prevalence), where high-diffusion networks
emerged (high network index).

causal effects might deviate from the correlation that the data alone would suggest.

4.2

How Exogenous Network Changes Affect Technology and Income

To measure the causal effect of social networks on technology and output in the model, we change
the network and observe the result. Surprisingly, we find that the effect of high-diffusion networks
can be positive, negative, or zero. In other words, while the correlation between networks and
income is strongly positive, the causal effect may not be. The result depends on the environment
the network is in. The reason is that high-diffusion networks can expose disease-prone countries to
income-reducing disease epidemics.
We begin by looking at social network effects in a low-disease environment. We start with our
network calibrated to the United States and then vary each network feature one at a time. For each
value of individualism, degree, and mobility, we double their values, one at a time. Specifically, we
simulate networks with nodes that have either nf = {4, 6}. High-degree networks have a higher
fraction of degree 6 nodes. For mobility, we consider annual moving probabilities p = {0, 0.1}.
High-mobility networks have more of the nodes that have a 1/10th chance of moving each year.
Finally, nodes are either individualist or collectivist. Individualist networks have a higher fraction
of individualist nodes. When we simulate a new economy with a different degree or mobility
parameter, we change the probability that every node in the network has a particular characteristic,
in a symmetric way.

19

Table 2: Main Result: Effect of social network features on output per capita.
benchmark
Low-disease economy
(0.05% initial prevalence)

High-disease economy
(0.18% initial prevalence)

growth
log(income)
tech diffusion
disease extinction
growth
log(income)
tech diffusion
disease extinction

3.35 %
6.70
1/25.2
59.4
1.33 %
2.66
1/73.4
196.3

double
individualists
3.44 %
6.88
1/24.1
58.5
1.29 %
2.58
1/75.8
196.9

double
high-degree
3.59 %
7.18
1/22.5
96.3
0.12 %
0.24
1/177.8
201.0

double
high-mobility
3.58 %
7.16
1/23.2
51.2
1.46 %
2.92
1/69.1
196.0

Entries report average annual growth, ending level of output per capita, ln(At+1 /At ), the number of periods it takes
for half-diffusion of a new technology (inverted), and the average number of periods until disease extinction. All are
averaged across 200 simulations, each of which runs 200 periods. Social networks are held constant. The network
is either the US social network or a network that is a US benchmark where one of the following is doubled: the
proportion of nodes that are individualist (from 44.5% to 89%), the proportion of high-degree nf = 6 nodes (from
60% to 100%), or the proportion of high-mobility mj = 0.1 nodes (from 31.2% to 62.5%). All other model features
and parameters are constant and reported in Table 1.

The top of Table 2 describes the effect of higher-diffusion networks in a low-disease economy.
This is the result one would expect: network features that facilitate diffusion speed the diffusion
of new technologies and boost income. The greatest gains come from mobility and degree, where a
doubling of more mobile or connected agents raises growth by 0.23-0.24 percentage points. Cumulated over 200 years, this network change raises incomes by 56-58%. This is a more modest effect
than the correlations suggest, but it is directionally consistent.
The bottom of Table 2 paints a different picture for a high disease economy. In most of these
experiments, altering the social network to facilitate faster diffusion lowers income. The effect is
most drastic for degree. For high-disease economies, doubling degree causes output to fall by 90%.
Likewise, individualism also impairs growth. The reason is that both perpetuate disease, which
compromises growth. Only mobility facilitates economic development for economies with both high
and low disease prevalence. Of course, mobile agents can also introduce disease to new communities.
But ideas are more prevalent than disease. Mobile agents spread ideas more than germs. Because
of the feedback from technology to the infection rate, the faster technology diffusion from mobile
agents speeds up disease extinction and promotes economic growth.
The bottom line is that the way in which networks affect economic growth depends on the disease
environment. High-diffusion networks in high-disease economies spread more disease. Because that
is the dominant effect, such networks – especially high-degree networks – can impoverish highdisease countries. These same networks also transmit more disease in low-disease countries. We
can see that effect in a longer time to extinction. The difference is that when new ideas are
20

prevalent and disease is rare, the net effect of spreading ideas and disease is positive. Thus, the
same networks that impoverish poor countries can facilitate growth in rich ones where epidemics
are rare. To thrive, each country needs a social network that is well adapted to its environment.
These causal effects can be substantially different from what the correlations suggest. Of course,
depending on when we measure, we could get small or arbitrarily large differences in income levels.
However, reporting income after 200 periods facilitates comparison with the previous results. For
high-disease economies, the effect of high-diffusion networks is the opposite of what the correlations
would predict. For low-disease economies, the results look more similar. After 200 periods, the
log incomes in the low-disease economy range from 6.7 to about 7.2. This translates into income
levels (not in logs) ranging from 812 to 1339, a roughly 50% difference in income per capita. This
is similar to the correlation results in Figure 2.
Parameter sensitivity.

The qualitative nature of the underlying data on social structure makes

this model a tricky one to calibrate, which makes exploring alternative parameter values particularly
important. For both low- and high-disease economies, we explored the robustness of our results
to changes in model parameters. In particular, we explore doubling and halving the values of the
probability of social change pξ , the technology transmission probability φ, the probability of disease
diffusion π. The effect of networks on technology and output is remarkably stable. It varies by
less than 20% across all of these different specifications. Table B.5 in Online Appendix B reports
results for each exercise individually.
Instead of doubling, we could have instead halved the prevalence of each of our network features.
Table B.6 in Online Appendix B also shows that most of these results are the same as well, in the
sense that, if doubling was detrimental to growth, halving is beneficial.
The Role of Disease-Technology Feedbacks. The disease-technology feedbacks help the model
to generate more nuanced results. In particular, when disease transmission rates fall as technology
improves, that force helps to prevent the extinction of high-diffusion types, who are more susceptible
to disease.
Turning off the feedbacks primarily affects high-disease economies. Turning off feedback 1, so
that the innovation rate does not depend on disease, makes high-disease economies grow faster. It
also makes high-diffusion networks more economically beneficial: If innovation does not depend on
disease, then when a high-diffusion network spreads disease, this has a less negative effect on output.
When we turn off feedback 2, so that the infection rate does not depend on technology, growth in
high-disease economies falls because these economies cannot innovate their way out of epidemics.
This is particularly costly for economies with high-diffusion networks because the benefits of their
technology diffusion are smaller, while the disease-promotive costs remain.

21

Details of these results and the calibration are in Table B.7 of Online Appendix B. The message
from this exercise is that the feedbacks strengthen our main conclusions but are not the sole drivers
of the interaction between networks, technology, and disease.

4.3

How Social Networks Adapt to Their Environment

Our main question is about the effect, not the origin, of networks. But to understand where and
why changing the structure of social networks might be harmful, it is useful to understand how a
country’s social network emerges.
In the model, what creates variation in networks is the initial level of disease and random
chance. Therefore, we simulate two economies that vary in their initial infection rates. In Figure
3, the results labeled “low disease” have an initial disease prevalence of 0.05%. The results labeled
“high disease” have an initial disease prevalence of 18%. All other parameters are the same across
the two sets of simulations. While disease rates evolve endogenously through the model’s contagion
process, the initial differences create persistent differences in social network structure and thus in
output.
Figure 3 illustrates how social networks adapt to the disease environment. A low-disease environment has an increasing number of individualist nodes with high degree and high mobility. Such
nodes thrive because they get new ideas faster than low-diffusion types. New ideas boost their
output. When other nodes change type, they adopt the type of the most economically successful nodes, which are the high-diffusion nodes. Thus, in low-disease environments, high-diffusion
network characteristics thrive.
But in high-disease environments (top right panel), high-diffusion nodes get sick quickly. They
may also get new ideas. But if a node is sick, it is unproductive, regardless of its technology.
One has to be alive and well to be productive. Therefore, when nodes change type, the most
economically successful types are the low-diffusion types because those agents are less likely to be
sick. In the high-disease environment, most nodes retain low-diffusion characteristics.
Since networks adapt to the disease environment, changing the network without changing the
disease environment can be disastrous. A high-diffusion network, in a place where disease is prevalent, is a recipe for epidemics and humanitarian crisis. At the same time, we also see that even after
disease is eradicated, the network persists. Table 2 reports that on average (80% of the simulations),
diseases are eradicated within 200 years. Yet, we see social network features persisting because they
are passed down, generation by generation. So, networks are adapted to their envirnoment. But,
when the environment changes, especially if the change is not life-threatening, social networks may
be slow to respond.

22

Figure 3: Initial Disease, Network Evolution, Extinction, and Output. These figures illustrate
the persistent effects of initial disease on social networks and output. The top two graphs report the fraction of the
model’s economies of individualists, high-degree agents, and high-mobility agents at each date t. The top left panel is
a low-disease economy that starts with a disease prevalence of 0.05%. The top right panel is a high-disease economy
that starts with 18% prevalence. The bottom two graphs plot the rate of disease extinction and output for both the
low-disease (low germs) and high-disease (high germs) economies.

60%

60%

Individualist
Degree
Mobility

50%

Fraction of Nodes

Fraction of Nodes

50%

40%

30%

40%

30%

Low disease economy

20%

0

100

200

300

400

High disease economy

20%

0

500

100

200

300

400

500

Time

Time

5

Individualist
Degree
Mobility

An Alternative Approach: Estimation with Instruments

So far, we learned that although the correlation between social networks and income is strong, the
causal evidence is more mixed: some economies benefit from high-diffusion networks, and others
do not. Before ending, we bring one additional perspective on the question of how social networks
matter for aggregate outcomes. This last approach uses instrumental variables to try to identify a
causal relationship in a nonstructural way. Both approaches are imperfect. In an environment with
equilibrium effects everywhere, no instrument will be exogenous to everything. Every model is also
surely wrong in some ways. We briefly pursue this second approach to measuring the importance
of networks in order to compare the two answers. We find that the model-based approach and the

23

identification-based approach deliver broadly consistent answers to the following question: For the
median country that has mostly eradicated communicable disease, how much do social networks
matter for the macroeconomy?

5.1

Measuring Social Networks

Our model features three dimensions of social network connections: individualism, degree, and
mobility.
Measuring Individualism

In our model, collectivism is defined as a social pattern of closely

linked or interdependent individuals. Individualism is its opposite. What distinguishes collectives
from sets of people with random ties to each other is that in collectives, two friends often have
a third friend in common. This is the sense in which they are interdependent. Hofstede defines
collectivism as
the degree to which individuals are integrated into groups. On the individualist side
we find societies in which the ties between individuals are loose: everyone is expected
to look after him/herself and his/her immediate family. On the collectivist side, we
find societies in which people from birth onwards are integrated into strong, cohesive
in-groups, often extended families (with uncles, aunts and grandparents) which continue
protecting them in exchange for unquestioning loyalty. (Hofstede, 2003, pp. 9-10)
As a proxy for individualism, we use country i’s Hofstede individualism index. This index was
constructed from data collected during an employee attitude survey program conducted by a large
multinational organization (IBM) within its subsidiaries in 72 countries. The survey took place
in two waves, in 1969 and 1972, and included questions about demographics, satisfaction, and
goals. The individual answers were aggregated at the country level after matching respondents by
occupation, age, and gender. The countries’ mean scores for 14 questions were then analyzed using
factor analysis, which resulted in the identification of two factors of equal strength that together
explained 46% of the variance.14 The individualism factor is mapped onto a scale from 1 to 100 to
create an index for each country.
14

Of course, IBM employees are not representative of country residents as a whole. Subsequent studies involving
commercial airline pilots and students (23 countries), civil service managers (14 countries), and consumers (15 countries) have validated Hofstede’s results. Online Appendix C describes these additional studies, as well as some of
Hofstede’s questions. The appendix also summarizes sociological theories that link these questions to network structure. Finally, it documents studies that map out partial social networks for small geographic areas. Taken together,
these network mapping studies reveal that highly collectivist countries, according to Hofstede, have a higher average
prevalence of network collectives.

24

Measuring Mobility

Most people form their strongest social ties through repeated social contact

with neighbors. Long-distance ties are likely to be with one’s former neighbors. Thus, mobility
governs the quantity of social ties in far-off locations. For US data, the census tells us the annual
probability of a US resident moving across state lines. For other countries, we do not have a large
cross-country panel of mobility data. But we do have extensive data on mobility for US residents,
including immigrants. The data come from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC)
of the Current Population Survey (CPS), from 1994 to 2013. We select individuals between ages
18 to 35 and use the variable BPL to assign country of origin. To measure mobility, we use the
variable MIGRATE1, which indicates whether the respondent had changed residence in the past
year. Movers are those who reported moving outside their state borders. Our measure of mobility
is the fraction of first-generation US immigrants from each country that move in a given year.
The underlying assumption is that people who move to the United States from countries with
higher degree/mobility maintain higher degree/mobility and pass these social network preferences
on to their children. This approach of using data for US residents follows Fernández and Fogli (2009)
and helps to control for institutional differences that might otherwise explain different behavior
across countries. At the same time, immigrants are a selected sample who likely have a higher
propensity for mobility and have been partly assimilated into American culture. As such, our
measure likely underestimates the differences in social network structure across countries.
Measuring Network Degree

A network’s degree is the average number of connections of a

node in the network, nf in the model. Our empirical proxy for network degree in each country is
the average number of close friends reported by US residents that report having ancestors coming
from that country. Our data come from the General Social Survey (GSS).15 The variable numgiven
asks, “From time to time, most people discuss important matters with other people. Looking back
over the last six months - who are the people with whom you discussed matters important to you?
Just tell me their first names or initials.” Based on this variable, we select respondents that report
having ancestors coming from another country and average their responses to construct an index
for network degree for each country in our sample.
In the GSS data set, only 28 countries are found. For the remaining countries, we impute degree
by estimating α, β1 , and β2 in : degreei = α + β1 hofstedei + β2 mobilityi + i . Then, we use the
predicted values from that regression to fill in our missing observations.
Network Diffusion Index Our three network features – collectivism/individualism, degree,
and mobility – all accelerate the diffusion of new technologies. Summarizing their effects jointly
15
We use the variable ethnic, which asks the country of origin of ancestors, to associate individuals with different
countries.

25

Table 3: Correlations

Individualism
Mobility
Degree

Degree
(1)

Individualism
(2)

1.000
0.364
0.545

1.000
0.471

Mobility
(3)

Index
loadings

1.000

0.575
0.540
0.615

The table reports correlations of the three measures of social network structure described in Section 5.1 and the
loadings of each measure on the network index.

facilitates graphical representation and later avoids econometric identification problems. Therefore,
we combine our network measures into a single network index. The index we construct is the first
principal component of the three measures (see equation (??)). The last column of Table 3 lists
the linear weights.
One might be concerned that all three measures capture the same variation. Table 3 also
describes the cross-correlation of our three measures of social networks. While the measures are
not uncorrelated, there is also some independent variation between them.
Comparing correlations in the model and data.

Before we continue describing how we

identify the effect of networks, it is useful to get some sense of the covariances. Figure 4 illustrates
the network features of each country in our data set. The last panel reports the disease prevalence
measure, as well as the combination of all the network features into a single network index.
By comparing the model estimation with the data estimation of the same relationship, we can
also get a sense for how quantitatively plausible the model is. Using the initial disease levels and
endogenous network and output outcomes, we run the same linear regression in the model as in
the cross-country data, to compare coefficients. We estimate the following linear models:
Data:

Model:

output = β1 + β2 Network Index + ,

(5)

output = β3 + β4 sumgerm + ˜,

(6)

where output per capita is A(t), Network Index is defined in (4), sumgerm is total disease prevalence,
the β’s are unknown coefficients, and , ˜ are mean-zero residuals.
The strong positive correlation between network diffusion and income comports with what we
see in the data. This finding is reassuring, since the model was not calibrated to match this
correlation or any closely related moments. In calibration parlance, these are “overidentifying
moments.” The similar orders of magnitude in Table 2 suggest that the model is a reasonable
26

Figure 4: Social network features, income and disease (data). The first three panels are each of
our three network measures (degree, collectivism/individualism, and mobility), ordered by log of income per capita.
The last panel illustrates the relationship between disease (pathogen) prevalence and the network index Ñ .

framework for quantifying network effects on income.
How large is this effect economically? Suppose every person in a given country had one more
friend. How much additional income would these estimates suggest? Since the standard deviation of
^ measure changes by 3.3. According to Equation 4, this increases
degree is 0.30, the adjusted degree
the Network Index by 0.61 × 3.3 = 2.01. Multiplying this by the model’s estimated coefficient on
Network Index delivers an increase of average output per capita of 2.01 × 1.59 = 3.20. How large is
that increase? Since the United States has average income (logY /L) of 10.5, this represents a 30%
increase in US GDP per capita.
27

Table 4: Comparing Endogenous Network Outcomes to Data. Entries are OLS estimated
coefficients of equations (5) or (6). Output in the data is real output per capita log(Y /L). In the model, output per
capita is A(t). Disease prevalence in the data is the disease prevalence index, defined in Section 5.1. In the model,
disease prevalence is the initial fraction of sick agents, which lies on a grid of 10 equally spaced points between 0.05%
and 18%. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Dependent variable: GDP per capita
Data
Model
network index

0.713***
(0.103)

71
0.409

Model

-0.640***
(0.0758)

-3.129***
(0.352)

71
0.508

10
0.908

1.591***
(0.067)

germs sum
Observations
R2

Data

10
0.986

Of course, that was a three-standard deviation change in a network feature, a rather large
change. Suppose that we change the fraction of individualists by 0.24, an amount that corresponds
to one standard deviation of individualism in the data. This increases the Network Index by 0.61.
When multiplied by the coefficient on Network Index estimated from model output, the predicted
effect on average output is 0.61 × 1.59 = 0.97. That represents a more modest 9.2% of US GDP.
A similar calculation implies that a 6% change in the probability of moving (also one standard
deviation in the data) would predict a change in GDP equal to 8.5% of US income. The bottom
line is that the estimation coefficients of the model and data reveal that, statistically, networks can
predict lots of variation in cross-country income.
Disease Difference Instrument.

Our theory suggests that an instrument with power to predict

social network structure Ñ is total disease prevalence. But this instrument is not likely to be valid,
both because technology affects disease (vaccines are a technology, for example) and because poor
health reduces productivity and diminishes one’s capacity for invention.
However, according to sociobiologists, the effect of disease on social networks depends on how
the disease is transmitted.16 Sociobiologists often classify infectious diseases by reservoir. The
reservoir is any person, animal, plant, soil, or substance in which an infectious agent normally
lives and multiplies. From the reservoir, the disease is transmitted to humans. Pathogens that
use humans as their reservoir (perhaps in addition to other reservoirs) have the potential to affect
social networks because they are passed on to more connected individuals more frequently. Zoonotic
16

See, for example, Smith et al. (2007) or Thornhill et al. (2010). Also, Birchenall (2014) and Murray and Schaller
(2010) argue that human-to-human transmitted diseases have a disproportionate effect on the pattern of social
relationships.

28

pathogens are those not carried by people, only by other animals. Their prevalence is less likely to
affect social networks in any systematic way.
Therefore, we construct two disease prevalence variables: the prevalence of all human-reservoir
diseases in a country, dh , and the prevalence of all zoonotic diseases in the country, dz . To distinguish
between the direct effect of disease on output and the effect of disease on networks, we construct the
˜
raw difference in disease prevalence as ∆germ
≡ dh − dz . Our results are cleaner if this difference is
uncorrelated with the sum of disease prevalence. Constructing the standardized difference ensures
this independence.17 Thus,
∆germ ≡



1
˜
dh − dz − mean(∆germ)
.
˜
std(∆germ)

(7)

Thus, our identifying assumption is
E[(dh − dz )] = 0.

(8)

We restricted the coefficients on dh and dz to be the same, meaning that human disease prevalence
and zoonotic disease prevalence have the same effect on technology. Hence, the total effect on
technology is determined by the sum dh + dz . This is orthogonal to the composition of the effect
between the two types of disease, dh − dz , which has no direct effect on A. Therefore, since the
diseases have different effects on networks Ñ and similar effects on the speed of technology diffusion
A, the instrument (dh − dz ) can be a powerful and valid instrument.

18

To measure the prevalence of both human and animal-transmitted diseases, we use historical
data. In recent times, disease prevalence dropped drastically with the medical advances of the
20th century. Yet, our model predicts that disease patterns generations ago might still affect social
networks today. The oldest comprehensive cross-country disease data come from the 1930s and
includes the following nine life-threatening diseases: leishmanias, leprosy, trypanosomes, malaria,
schistosomes, filariae, dengue, typhus, and tuberculosis. Most of the prevalence data come from
Murray and Schaller (2010),19 who use a four-point coding scheme: 0 = completely absent or never
17

When var(dh ) = var(dz ), the difference (dh − dz ) is orthogonal to the sum (dh + dz ).
We do not need to know all the determinants of social structure. Rather, any subset of the determining variables
can serve as a valid instrument for Ñ . Similarly, we do not need to observe Ñ exactly. A proxy variable with random
measurement noise is sufficient for an unbiased instrumental variables estimate of the coefficient β2 . To ensure that
this approach is also model consistent, Online Appendix B.5 verifies that in the model, this disease difference is a
valid instrument. Online Appendix C.9 discusses some additional endogeneity concerns and the ways in which we
address them.
19
The Murray and Schaller (2010) data are based primarily on epidemiological maps provided in Rodenwaldt and
Jusatz (1961) and Simmons et al. (1945), and originally collected by the Medical Intelligence Division of the United
States Army. The one exception is tuberculosis, which comes from the National Geographic Society’s (2005) Atlas of
the World. For each region, they coded the prevalence of tuberculosis on a three-point scale: 1 = 3 − 49, 2 = 50 − 99,
3 = 100 or more per 100,000 people.
18

29

Table 5: Social networks and GDP per capita (data)
. of log(Y /L) = β1 + β2 Ñ + . Ñ is estimated from a
Columns report the β2 coefficient from an IV estimation
first-stage regression N etwork Index = β3 + β4 ∆germs + 2 . The Network Index is defined in equation (4). The
instrument ∆germ is defined in equation (7). English, which is 1 if the country is English-speaking, allows for a
Sargan test for validity of the ∆germ instrument. Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.
Dependent variable:
Instruments:
∆germ
germs sum

First stage: Network index
∆germ
∆germ & English
-0.422***
(0.123)
-0.503***
(0.0706)

english

-0.448***
(0.118)
-0.424***
(0.0736)
1.446***
(0.537)

network index
Constant

Observations
F-stat
R2
Sargan-p

Second stage: GDP per capita
∆germ
∆germ & English

-0.297*
(0.171)

-0.361***
(0.138)

0.556**
(0.236)
10.10***
(0.549)
71
41.09
0.551
0.520

1.973***
(0.299)

1.561***
(0.325)

0.684**
(0.307)
9.849***
(0.672)

71
31.12
0.478

71
25.07
0.529

71
38.17
0.517

reported, 1 = rarely reported, 2 = sporadically or moderately reported, and 3 = present at severe
levels or epidemic levels at least once.
We have prevalence of all nine diseases in 160 countries. For each country, we add up the
prevalence score from each disease to get that country’s disease prevalence index.
Online Appendix C contains more information about the diseases and their characteristics.
What Do Linear Estimates Teach Us? Table 5 reveals that more prevalent human-to-human
disease is associated with a lower-diffusion social network. It also teaches us that higher-diffusion
social networks boost GDP per capita. As expected, disease prevalence lowers output. All of these
results are qualitatively consistent with the model. The bigger question is whether social networks
matter quantitatively.
The magnitude of the coefficient on the network index in Table 5 implies that a one-standarddeviation increase in the network index (1.45 units) increases log output per worker by 1.45×0.684 =
0.99, which represents a 99% increase in real GDP per capita. Like the correlations from both the
data and the model, that is a large effect. These large estimates suggest that social network
structures might be relevant for macroeconomists and that policy makers might want to craft
policies to alter these networks to promote growth.
However, Table 6 suggests a more subtle message that echoes the results of the model. The
30

Table 6: Social networks and GDP per capita: Split sample
. of log(Y /L) = β1 + β2 Ñ + . Variables and first-stage
Columns report the β2 coefficient from an IV estimation
regression are described in Table 5. High (low) disease are countries with a disease score above 14 (below 12).
Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Dependent variable: GDP per capita
Network Index
Constant
Observations

High disease

Low disease

-0.371
(1.682)
7.455***
(1.438)
34

0.882***
(0.327)
7.001**
(2.881)
26

positive effect of social networks only appears for the low-disease prevalence countries. For countries
with high disease prevalence, the estimates of the effect of higher diffusion networks on income are
negative and insignificant. When we include other controls, such as English-language dummy
variable and total disease prevalence, the pattern of significant effects is robust only for low-disease
countries. These results echo the finding of the model that changing social networks can be highly
beneficial in some countries. However, installing a high-diffusion social network in countries where
such social structures are maladapted, at best shows no benefit and at worst could be destructive.
Robustness One reason the difference in the prevalence of human and zoonotic diseases might
be invalid would be if human diseases were much more virulent, so that the difference predicted
severe disability and thus reduced output. Another question is whether social networks are simply
a proxy for some other economic variable. Online Appendix C explores both questions.

6

Conclusions

Measuring the effect of social network structure on the economic development of countries is a challenging task. Networks are difficult to measure and susceptible to problems with reverse causality.
We use a theory of social network evolution to identify properties of social networks that can be
matched with data and to select promising instrumental variables that can predict network structure. The theory predicts that societies with higher disease prevalence are more likely to adopt
low-diffusion social networks. Such networks inhibit disease transmission, but they also inhibit
idea transmission. This model reveals which social features should speed or slow diffusion. It also
suggests that disease prevalence might be a useful instrument for a social network because it affects
how social networks evolve.
Quantifying the model reveals that small initial differences in the epidemiological environment
31

can give rise to large differences in network structure that persist. Over time, these persistent
network differences can generate substantial divergence in technology diffusion and output. We find
evidence of this social network effect in the data. Exploiting the differential mode of transmission of
germs, we are able to identify a significant effect of social network structure on technology diffusion
and income. Specifically, we find that a one-standard-deviation change in social network structure
can increase the growth of output per worker by 1/2% per year.
More broadly, the paper’s contribution is to offer a theory of the origins of social institutions,
propose one way in which these institutions might interact with the macroeconomy, and show how
to quantify and test this relationship.

References
Acemoglu, D. and S. Johnson (2005). Unbundling institutions. Journal of Political Economy 113 (5), 949–
995.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2002). Reversal of fortune: Geography and institutions in
the making of the modern world income distribution. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1231–1294.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2007). Social attitudes and macroeconomic performance: An epidemiological
approach. Working paper, Paris East and PSE.
Arrow, K. J. (1969). Classificatory notes on the production and transmission of technological knowledge.
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 59 (2), 29–35.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2012). The ‘out of africa’ hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and comparative
economic development. American Economic Review 103 (1), 1–46.
Birchenall, J. (2014). Disease and diversity in long-term economic development. Working Paper, University
of California at Santa Barbara.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001). The economics of cultural transmission and the dynamics of preferences.
Journal of Economic Theory 97(2), 298–319.
Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, and J. Sevilla (2004). The effect of health on economic growth: A production
function approach. World development 32 (1), 1–13.
Brock, W. A. and S. N. Durlauf (2006). Social interactions and macroeconomics. In D. Colander (Ed.),
Post-Walrasian Macroeconomics: Beyond the Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model, pp. 97–115.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Centola, D. and M. Macy (2007). Complex contagions and the weakness of long ties. American Journal of
Sociology 113(3), 702–734.
Chaney, T. (2014, November). The network structure of international trade. American Economic Review 104 (11), 3600–3634.
Comin, D., M. Dmitriev, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2013). The spatial diffusion of technology. Working paper,
Princeton University.

32

Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2010a).
view 100 (5), 2031–59.

An exploration of technology diffusion.

American Economic Re-

Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2010b, December). An exploration of technology diffusion. American Economic
Review 100 (5), 2031–59.
Conley, T. G. and C. R. Udry (2010). Learning about a new technology: Pineapple in ghana. American
Economic Review 100(1), 35–69.
de la Croix, D., M. Doepke, and J. Mokyr (2017). Clans, guilds, and markets: Apprenticeship institutions
and growth in the pre-industrial economy. Northwestern University Working Paper.
Doepke, M. and M. Tertilt (2009). Women’s liberation: What’s in it for men?
Economics 124(4), 1541–1591.

Quarterly Journal of

Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2014). Culture, entrepreneurship, and growth. in Handbook of Economic
Growth 2 ed. by P. Aghion and S.N. Durlauf, pp. 1-48. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Fernández, R. and A. Fogli (2009, January). Culture: An empirical investigation of beliefs, work, and
fertility. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1), 146–77.
Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (1995). Learning by doing and learning from others: Human capital
and technical change in agriculture. Journal of Political Economy 103(6), 1176–1209.
Ghana Health Service (2008). 2008 GHS Annual Report.
Goenka, A. and L. Liu (2015). Infectious diseases, human capital and economic growth. Working paper,
University of Rochester.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland (2017). Culture, institutions, and the wealth of nations. Review of
Economics and Statistics 99 (3), 402–416.
Granovetter, M. S. (2005). The impact of social structure on economic outcomes. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 19(1), 33–50.
Greenwood, J. and N. Guner (2010). Social change. International Economic Review 51(4), 893–923.
Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu (2005). Engines of liberation. Review of Economic Studies 72(1), 109–133.
Greif, A. (1994). Cultural beliefs and the organization of society: A historical and theoretical reflection on
collectivist and individualist societies. Journal of Political Economy 102 (5), 912–950.
Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (1999). Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker than
others? Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1), 83–116.
Hamilton, W. D. and M. Zuk (1982). Heritable true fitness and bright birds: A role for parasites? Science 218 (4570), 384–387.
Hofstede, G. (2003). Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and Organizations
Across Nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage publications.
Jackson, M. (2008). Social and Economic Networks (1st ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kelley, B., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2013). Firm volatility in granular networks. Working paper,
New York University.

33

Loehle, C. (1995). Social barriers to pathogen transmission in wild animal populations. Ecology 76(2),
326–335.
Lucas, R. and B. Moll (2014). Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time. Journal of Political Economy 122 (1), 1–51.
Mali, S., S. Steele, L. Slutsker, and P. M. Arguin (2008). Malaria surveillance - united states, 2006. Surveillance Summaries, 24–39.
Munshi, K. (2004). Social learning in a heterogeneous population: Technology diffusion in the indian green
revolution. Journal of Development Economics 73 (1), 185–213.
Murray, D. R. and M. Schaller (2010). Historical prevalence of infectious diseases within 230 geopolitical
regions: A tool for investigating origins of culture. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 41(1), 99–108.
National Geographic Society (2005). Atlas of the World (8th ed.). Washington, DC: National Geographic
Society.
Oberfield, E. (2013). Business networks, production chains, and productivity: A theory of input-output
architecture. Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Perla, J. and C. Tonetti (2011). Endogenous risk and growth. Working paper, New York University.
Rauch, J. E. and A. Casella (2001). Networks and Markets (1st ed.). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Rodenwaldt, E. and H. Jusatz (1961). World Atlas of Epidemic Diseases, 1952-1961. Hamburg: Falk Verlag.
Rogers, E. M. (1976). New product adoption and diffusion. Journal of Consumer Research 2(4), 290–301.
Ryan, B. and N. Gross (1943). The diffusion of hybrid seed corn in two iowa communities. Rural Sociology 8,
15–24.
Simmons, J. S., T. F. Whayne, G. W. Anderson, and H. M. Horack (1945). Global Epidemiology: A Geography
of Disease and Sanitation (1st ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Smith, K. F., D. F. Sax, S. D. Gaines, V. Guernier, and J.-F. Guegan (2007). Globalization of human
infectious disease. Ecology 88(8), 1903–1910.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009). The diffusion of development. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2),
469–529.
Tabellini, G. (2010). Culture and institutions: Economic development in the regions of europe. Journal of
the European Economic Association 8(4), 677–716.
Tertilt, M. (2005). Polygyny, fertility, and savings. Journal of Political Economy 113(6), 1341–1371.
Thornhill, R., C. L. Fincher, D. R. Murray, and M. Schaller (2010). Zoonotic and non-zoonotic diseases in
relation to human personality and societal values: Support for the parasite-stress model. Evolutionary
Psychology 8(2), 151–169.
Travers, J. and S. Milgram (1969). An experimental study of the small world problem. Sociometry 32(4),
425–443.
U.S. Census Bureau (2006). Current population survey, annual social and economic supplement.
Watts, D. J. and S. H. Strogatz (1998). Collective dynamics of “small-world” networks. Nature 393 (6684),
440–442.

34

Weil, D. N. (2007). Accounting for the effect of health on economic growth. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122 (3), 1265–1306.
Young, H. P. (2009). Innovation diffusion in heterogeneous populations: Contagion, social influence, and
social learning. American Economic Review 99(5), 1899–1924.

35

