Journal Pre-proof

The rate of communication
Shiyang Huang , Byoung-Hyoun Hwang , Dong Lou
PII:
DOI:
Reference:

S0304-405X(21)00127-6
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.03.013
FINEC 3338

To appear in:

Journal of Financial Economics

Received date:
Revised date:
Accepted date:

28 October 2019
16 June 2020
16 July 2020

Please cite this article as: Shiyang Huang , Byoung-Hyoun Hwang , Dong Lou , The rate of communication, Journal of Financial Economics (2021), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.03.013

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

The rate of communication
Shiyang Huanga, huangsy@hku.hk, Byoung-Hyoun Hwangb,*, bh.hwang@ntu.edu.sg, Dong Louc,d, d.lou@lse.ac.uk
a

Faculty of Business and Economics (HKU Business School), The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
b

Nanyang Business School, NTU, Singapore

c

London School of Economics, London, United Kingdom

d

Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR), London, United Kingdom

*

Corresponding author.

ABSTRACT
We study the transmission of financial news and opinions through social
interactions among retail investors in the United States. We identify a series of
plausibly exogenous shocks, which cause ―treated investors‖ to trade
abnormally. We then trace the ―contagion‖ of abnormal trading activity from
the treated investors to their neighbors and their neighbors’ neighbors.
Coupled with methodology drawn from epidemiology, our setting allows us to
estimate the rate of communication and how it varies with the characteristics
of the underlying investor population.
Keywords
Social Interaction, Investor communication, Information diffusion
JEL classification
G11, G12, G14, G20
1. Introduction
People do not operate in a social vacuum; instead, they constantly interact with one another. Social
interactions ensure that we are privy to the latest news, ideas, and opinions. But they also expose us to the
spread of noise or even misinformation. While the theme of contagion and diffusion has been examined
by many disciplines (e.g., Berger, 2014, 2016; Jackson, 2014, 2019), there is likely no field that has
1

looked at this subject more extensively than the field of epidemiology (e.g., Keeling and Grenfell, 2000;
Heesterbeek, 2002; Heffernan, Smith, and Wahl, 2005; Delamater et al., 2019). The goal of this study is
to draw from the epidemiology literature and to estimate the ―effective transmission rate‖ of financial
news and opinion and how it varies with investor characteristics.
The ideal experiment with which to address our research question would be to randomly seed
pieces of information among investors and then track their diffusion through the investors’ respective
networks. Our empirical design draws inspiration from this ideal. In particular, we consider a series of
cross-industry stock-financed mergers and acquisitions (M&As). At the completion of each cross-industry
stock-financed M&A, investors in the target firm, residing in some industry x, receive shares of the
acquirer firm, residing in some industry y. We conjecture that the endowment of shares from the acquirer
industry leads at least some of the affected investors to form opinions about the acquirer industry and to
start trading firms in the acquirer industry (aside from the acquirer firm itself). If such ―target investors‖
communicate their newly gained industry perspectives to other investors in their neighborhood, we may
observe abnormal trading activity in the acquirer industry not only by target investors but also by their
neighbors and their neighbors’ neighbors. Tracing the contagion of abnormal trading activity in the
acquirer industry thus enables us to estimate the degree to which financial information spreads through
social interactions and the extent to which the ―effective transmission rate‖ varies with the characteristics
of the sender of the financial information and the receivers of it.
To implement our empirical tests, we combine detailed trading records of about 70,000
households in the United States from a discount brokerage for 1991 to 1996 with data on all crossindustry stock-financed M&As that occurred over the same time period.
To gauge the validity of our empirical design, we first conduct a simple difference-in-differences
analysis to see how much more intensely target investors trade in the acquirer industry in the post-M&A
period (excluding trading activity in the acquirer firm itself). We repeat the above difference-indifferences analysis for ―target neighbors‖; target neighbors are non-target retail investors who reside
within three miles of a target investor.
2

Our results reveal that in the year following the completion of a cross-industry stock-financed
M&A, target investors more than double the number of trades they execute in the corresponding acquirer
industry as compared to other investors. This abnormal trading activity in the acquirer industry dies out
within two years.
Consistent with the presence of contagion, we find that target neighbors also trade substantially
more actively in the acquirer industry compared to investors who do not live within three miles of a target
investor. Target investors and target neighbors tend to trade in the same direction; that is, if a target
investor is buying in the acquirer industry, so are the investor’s neighbors. Consistent with ―word of
mouth‖ playing a role in generating our results, our effect becomes statistically and economically weaker
the further away an investor resides from a target investor.
In a placebo test to help rule out alternative interpretations, we consider cross-industry M&As
that are 100% cash-financed. In cash-financed M&As, target investors receive cash as opposed to shares
in the acquirer firm and, as such, are less incentivized to study the corresponding acquirer industry. We
find that our effect disappears when we consider cash-financed M&As. Moreover, inconsistent with a
simple local attention story, we observe little abnormal trading activity when a stock-financed M&A is
first announced. Instead, abnormal trading activity accrues only after target investors receive shares of the
acquirer firm.
Our main analysis builds on the above findings and utilizes methodology drawn from the
epidemiology literature to estimate an analog of the reproduction number; the reproduction number is the
average number of new infections generated by a single infective. We hereafter refer to this analog as the
rate of communication, or, simply, the communication rate. We also estimate how much the
communication rate varies with the characteristics of the underlying investor population, including age,
income, gender, past investment performances, measures of lifestyle, and state of residence.

3

Our estimate of the overall communication rate is 0.32 with a 95% confidence interval of 0.17 to
0.46. In other words, one ―infected‖ investor, on average, ―infects‖ 0.32 neighbors.1 As we discuss in
Section 2.1, an outbreak will fade if the reproduction number falls below one; a disease will continue to
spread and grow if the number is above one. Our communication rate of 0.32 thus suggests that while the
transmission of financial information through social interactions is significant, it eventually dissipates
without intervention, at least in our setting. To put this number in perspective, Cao et al. (2020) estimate
that the effective reproduction number of COVID-19 in China during the onset of its outbreak (December
2019–January 2020) was 4.08 with a 95% confidence interval of 3.37 to 4.77.
A key difference between the transmission of a pathogen and the transmission of an idea is that
the latter occurs voluntarily. That is, for an idea to transmit, a mere interaction between two individuals is
not sufficient. The sender of the information must be motivated to share the idea. In addition, the receiver
must be willing to listen and consider the idea interesting and credible enough to absorb and act on the
idea. This line of thinking forms the basis for our analysis of how much the communication rate varies
with characteristics of the underlying investor population.
Our first set of determinants is motived by studies of homophily. These studies note that people
prefer to interact with people of similar backgrounds. They are also more likely to trust information
received from these individuals (Lazarsfeld and Merton, 1954; McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook,
2001). Transmissions are thus substantially stronger between people with similar backgrounds (Jackson,
2019).
Consistent with this perspective, we find that the transmission of an investment idea is strongest
when there are few differences in age, income, or gender between the sender of financial information and
the receiver. While our estimate of the overall communication rate is 0.32, we find that the
communication rate between investors of the same age, the same income category, and the same gender
rises to 0.47 with a 95% confidence interval of 0.29 to 0.65. When comparing the relative importance of
1

We obtain this estimate when measuring trading activity in the acquirer industry through the number of trades placed in the
acquirer industry. All estimates reported in the Introduction are based on the number of trades. As we discuss below, the
estimates are similar when considering the dollar value of trades.

4

differences in age, income, and gender in slowing down transmission, we find that a ten-year age gap, a
one-category difference in income, and being of an alternate gender lowers the communication rate by 9%,
3%, and 12%, respectively. That is, in the investment context, differences in age and gender represent
higher barriers to information transmission than differences in income.2
A key strength of our setting is that we can pinpoint both the sender of financial information and
the receivers. We use this feature to uncover notable asymmetries. In particular, our results suggest that
while transmissions are strongest among investors of similar age, gender, and income, relatively speaking,
transmission from older, high-income, female investors to younger, low-income, male investors is
stronger than transmission in the reverse direction. One possible explanation for these asymmetries is that
investors perceive information conveyed by older, wealthier, female investors as more credible and, thus,
are more likely to act on any views transmitted by such investors.
Our second set of determinants relate to investors’ past investment performances. The psychology
literature finds that people are more likely to share a story and others are more likely to listen if the story
helps receivers re-access positive emotional experiences. That is, people are more likely to converse about
a story if it invokes pleasant memories (Lovett, Peres, and Shachar, 2013; Berger, 2014, 2016). Consistent
with this view, Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012), Heimer and Simon (2015), and Escobar and Pedraza (2019)
find evidence that investors more frequently share stories of investment success than stories of investment
failure. Han, Hirshleifer, and Walden (2020) model the implications of agents’ preferences for sharing
successes over failures.
In our setting, we conjecture that the communication rate is a function not only of the sender’s
past investment performance but also of that of the receiver. If receivers have suffered recent investment
failures, they are unlikely to entertain a conversation about investment-related topics and, consequently,
act on any ideas so transmitted.

2

Our data vendor uses nine income categories based on the following cutoffs: $15,000, $20,000, $30,000, $40,000, $50,000,
$75,000, $100,000, and $125,000. A one-category difference in annual income therefore represents a sizeable income difference.

5

In line with this view, we find that the communication rate is the highest, 0.44, when both the
sender’s and the receiver’s recent portfolio performances are above the sample median. If the sender’s
recent portfolio performance is above the median, yet the receiver’s performance is below the median, the
communication rate drops by 16% to 0.37. The communication rate is the lowest, 0.29, when both the
sender’s and the receiver’s portfolio performances are below the sample median. Comparing these figures
with those based on differences in investors’ socioeconomic backgrounds, we can infer that recent
investment performances are a stronger determinant of the rate of communication than differences in
socioeconomic backgrounds.
Our third and final set of determinants captures similarities (or differences) in lifestyle and state
of residence. In short, we find that the communication rate is highest when the sender and the receiver
lead a similar lifestyle as approximated through common ownership of unique vehicles (truck,
recreational vehicle (RV), motorcycle). Moreover, the communication rate is highest in states for which
survey evidence indicates that people spend more time visiting friends (Putnam, 2000).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes and situates our paper in the
corresponding literatures. Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 introduces our empirical setting and
presents evidence that people turn to each other for financial advice and investment ideas. Section 5
estimates the rate of communication and how it varies with the characteristics of the underlying investor
population. Section 6 examines whether, in our setting, investors transmit value-relevant information or
merely spread noise. Section 7 concludes.

2. Literature review and contribution
Our paper builds on two streams of research: medical studies of how frequently various
pathogens are transmitted and finance studies providing evidence of word-of-mouth effects in financial
markets.

2.1. Pathogen transmission
6

The reproduction number is one of the most fundamental and most frequently examined metrics
in epidemiology (e.g., Keeling and Grenfell, 2000; Heesterbeek, 2002; Heffernan, Smith, and Wahl,
2005; Delamater et al., 2019). The reproduction number is the mean number of infections generated by a
single pathogen. The basic reproduction number is the reproduction number when there is no immunity in
the population; it describes the maximum epidemic potential of a pathogen. The effective reproduction
number is the reproduction number when there is some immunity in the population through either prior
exposure or vaccination.
The reproduction number is used to describe the intensity of an outbreak and to gauge its
potential size (Heffernan, Smith, and Wahl, 2005). It is also used to estimate the proportion of the
population that needs to be vaccinated to contain an epidemic (Anderson and May, 1982, 1985). When no
vaccine exists, the reproduction number is a crucial component in public health planning (Doucleff, 2014;
Flaxman et al., 2020).
The reproduction number is naturally a function of the pathogen (e.g., how infectious it is). It is
also a function of the host population and the environment (e.g., population density, age distribution, and
overall level of hygiene). As a result, even for a given disease there is never a single reproduction
number. By its very nature, the reproduction number varies with both time and locale. Such variation is
exacerbated by the fact that any true reproduction number has to be estimated (Delamater et al., 2019).
Not surprisingly, even for a given disease, the estimated reproduction numbers reported in the
literature vary widely. For instance, in a survey of the literature, Anderson (1982) finds that the reported
basic reproduction numbers for measles range from 5.4 to 18. Guerra et al. (2017) note an even wider
range of feasible reproduction numbers, going from 3.7 to 203.3.
Despite, or perhaps as a result of, the above challenges, and given the importance of reproduction
numbers, many studies attempt to estimate the reproduction numbers of various pathogens and quantify
how much they vary with the characteristics of the host and the environment (e.g., Keeling and Grenfell,
2000; Heesterbeek, 2002; Heffernan, Smith, and Wahl, 2005; Guerra et al., 2017).

7

2.2. Word-of-mouth effects in financial markets
The concept of contagion has begun to also spark the curiosity of finance researchers,
accompanied by calls ―to move from behavioral finance to social finance‖ (Hirshleifer, 2020 AFA
Presidential Address) and to exert greater research effort toward better understanding ―the epidemiology
of narratives‖ (Shiller, 2017 AEA Presidential Address).
Shiller and Pound (1989) are perhaps the first to consider the transmission of financial
information through social interactions. They conduct surveys of both retail investors and institutional
investors. They conclude that, in general, investors do not derive investment ideas by themselves. Rather,
they are drawn to stocks through conversations with their peers.
Evidence in subsequent work supports the notion that the transmission of investment ideas
through social interactions is both frequent and important. Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) find that a fund
manager purchases more of a stock when other managers from different fund families in the same city
increase their purchases of the same stock. Ivković and Weisbenner (2007) find that the above positive
correlation in trading behavior between neighbors extends to retail investors. Hvide and Östberg (2015)
utilize micro data, which allow them to identify coworkers at the plant level. They find that an increase in
the fraction of coworkers who make a stock purchase in a given month increases the probability that a
worker makes a stock purchase.
Our study builds on the above literature. The key distinction is that we identify a series of
plausibly exogenous shocks that cause ―treated investors‖ to trade abnormally. We then dynamically trace
the percolation of abnormal trading activity through treated investors’ social networks. Our approach
allows us to provide an estimate of the rate of communication between investors. It also allows us to
quantify how much this rate varies with investors’ socioeconomic backgrounds, recent investment
performances, and lifestyles. Metaphorically speaking, while prior studies provide evidence that ―people
can get sick from each other,‖ to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to provide an actual estimate
of the ―contagion rate,‖ as well as estimates of how much this rate varies with the characteristics of the
host population. Our estimates can help inform theory. They can also help guide the design of public
8

policy and information campaigns. Of course, estimating the rate of communication is not without its
challenges and is subject to various caveats. We discuss these challenges and caveats in Sections 3 and 5.

3. Data
3.1. Data sources and descriptive statistics
We obtain detailed investor trading records for a subsample of US households for the 1991–1996
period from a discount brokerage firm. These are the same records used by Odean (1998) and Barber and
Odean (2001), among others.3 The brokerage database contains ZIP Code information, which enables us
to compute the distance between two investors using the longitude and latitude associated with each ZIP
Code, adjusted for curvature.4 We augment our data with information from the US Census Bureau’s ZIP
Code database, which, among other things, includes the population and average household income for
each ZIP Code.
We match our investor trading records with data on all M&As that take place from 1991 to 1996.
In constructing our M&A sample, we follow the procedure laid out in Mitchell and Pulvino (2001). We
require that the acquirer and target firms reside in separate industries. Industries are defined based on the
Fama-French 49-industry classification. Using alternative industry classifications, such as the FamaFrench 38- or 30-industry classifications or the Global Industry Classification Standard industry groups
does not change the main results of the paper (results available upon request). We exclude M&As for
which we cannot identify the acquirer or the target industry. We separate M&A deals into those that are
stock-financed and those that are cash-financed: we define the former as deals that are at least partially
equity-financed; the latter are 100% cash-financed.
Our final sample contains 459 M&As executed from 1991 to 1996, of which 316 are stockfinanced and 143 are cash-financed. In Panel A of Table 1, we report summary statistics for these M&A
3

In our data, one household can have multiple accounts. We conduct our analyses at the household level; that is, we aggregate all
accounts held by the same household into one observation. Henceforth, we use the terms ―households‖ and ―investors‖
interchangeably.
4
The formula is: distance = arccos(cos(a1)cos(a2)cos(b1)cos(b2) + cos(a1)sin(a2)cos(b1)sin(b2) + sin(a1)sin(b1)) * 3963, where a1
and b1 (a2 and b2) are the latitudes (longitudes) of the two Zip Codes and 3,963 miles is the radius of the Earth.

9

deals. For stock-financed M&As, the median acquirer-market capitalization is $952 million and the
median target-market capitalization is $72 million. For cash-financed M&As, the median acquirer-market
capitalization is $1,561 million and the median target-market capitalization is $93 million.
We end up with a sample of around 70,000 investor accounts. Fig. 1 displays a heat map of the
number of investors in each state. As can be seen in Fig. 1, the investors in our sample are
disproportionately clustered on the East Coast and the West Coast. In Panel B of Table 1, we provide
summary characteristics for the investors in our sample. The median and mean portfolio sizes are $13,141
and $41,030, respectively. The average investor holds 3.88 stocks and places 0.47 trades a month, with an
average monthly trade value of $5,679. The average investor age in our sample is 42 and the average
annual household income is $69,500. Panel C provides summary statistics for households (residents) in
each ZIP Code.

3.2. Caveats
Perhaps the most appealing feature of our data is that our trading records are highly detailed and
the median retail investor in our sample holds (only) three stocks. As a result, substituting any one stock
position with another stock from a different industry is likely to have a significant effect on investor
attention.
Our data are also subject to several caveats. First, the set of retail investors in our sample is not
randomly drawn as, by construction, they are all clients of the same discount brokerage firm. To the
extent that having a common broker is an indication of belonging to the same ―cluster,‖ given that
transmissions are stronger within a cluster than across clusters (Jackson, 2019), our estimate of the overall
level of contagiousness of financial information is likely to be upwardly biased. We are less concerned
about this particular bias as it merely reinforces our conclusion that, at least for our type of financial news
and opinion, transmission dies out on its own without intervention.
We are more concerned about a second shortcoming. The landscape of the US equity market has
changed dramatically over the past three decades. This change in landscape does not necessarily
10

invalidate our exercise. After all, by their very nature, transmission rates vary with the characteristics of
the host and the environment and, thus, with time. However, it does raise questions about whether we can
extrapolate our results to today’s marketplace.
We are mindful of this concern and, in fact, strongly suspect that today’s level of contagiousness
is different from its level in the 1990s. In particular, we suspect that, with the advent of modern
communication technologies, information has become more contagious.5 We believe that examining the
extent to which the level of contagiousness has changed represents an interesting subject for future
research. Relatedly, it would be interesting to explore how much contagiousness varies across distinct
types of financial information.6
As much as we are mindful of the possibility that our estimate of the overall level of
contagiousness does not describe today’s marketplace, we suspect that our estimates of how much the
level of contagiousness varies with investor characteristics (still) do. The reason is that there are inherent,
persistent behavioral components in social structures and norms that likely do not vary much through time
(e.g., the tendency to interact with people of similar age). We thus suspect that whatever variation in
information transmission we find in our setting still applies today. Such persistence would be consistent
with findings in the epidemiology literature that while the reproduction number varies dramatically across
diseases (Doucleff, 2014), there is consistency across diseases in the extent to which reproduction
numbers vary with characteristics of the host and the environment, such as population density and the
general level of hygiene (Keeling and Grenfell, 2000; Heesterbeek, 2002; Heffernan, Smith, and Wahl,
2005).

4. Our empirical setting
A major challenge facing empirical, non-experimental research on diffusion and contagion is the
presence of common shocks that affect everyone. To illustrate by example, prior studies generally infer
5

At the same time, we caution that there is also research suggesting that, even in recent years, a mere 7% of word of mouth
happens online (Berger, 2016).
6
Chen and Hwang (2020) provide some evidence in this regard.

11

the transmission of financial information through positive correlations in trading patterns between
investors residing in the same locale. Yet, if two investors in the same locale exhibit correlated trading
patterns, how can we be certain that they actually communicate with one another rather than simply have
similar backgrounds/tastes/preferences and/or access to the same local news?
Some studies address this common-shock problem through natural experiments, which generate
random assignments of individuals to classes or cohorts (e.g., Duflo and Saez, 2003; Lerner and
Malmendier, 2013; Shue, 2013). Others follow a regression discontinuity approach (e.g., Anderson and
Magruder, 2012). Still others conduct field studies. For instance, Banerjee et al. (2019) seed information
on a raffle in three subsets of rural villages in India: in the first subset, the information is seeded with
randomly selected individuals; in the second subset, the information is seeded with village elders; in the
third subset, the information is seeded with individuals nominated by villagers as the ―best gossipers.‖
The authors then analyze which setting generates the highest information diffusion rate by counting the
number of phone calls made by villagers to enter the raffle.
Our empirical design draws inspiration from that of Banerjee et al. (2019). Rather than seeding a
raffle, our setting seeds attention to an industry among US retail investors; we think that our seeding
through M&As is plausibly exogenous to the backgrounds/tastes/preferences of retail investors. Rather
than count the number of phone calls made, we check for abnormal trading activity in the acquirer
industry by target neighbors.
There are of course other differences but, overall, we consider the general idea behind our
research design to be similar to that of Banerjee et al. (2019) and we believe we can draw appropriate
causal inferences. In the next two subsections, we discuss two simple difference-in-differences analyses
to gauge the soundness of our general idea.

4.1. Does the endowment of acquirer shares lead to increased trading in the acquirer industry by target
investors?

12

First, we gauge the validity of our assumption that the endowment of acquirer shares draws target
investors’ attention to the corresponding acquirer industry and increases trading activity in the acquirer
industry. We estimate the following regression equation:
(1)
where Trading Acti,m is the number (or dollar value) of trades by investor in the acquirer industry after
cross-industry stock-financed M&A m as a fraction of investor

total number (or dollar value) of trades

across all industries. Since the exact completion date is missing for many M&As, we examine total
trading behavior in months 7 to 18 after the M&A is announced as, on average, it takes around six
calendar months for a stock-financed M&A to complete (Giglio and Shu, 2014).
Since target investors are bound to sell their holdings in the acquirer firm, we exclude the
acquirer firm when calculating trading activity in the acquirer industry. To exclude dormant accounts, we
require that investors place at least one trade (in any stock) in the year prior to and the year following the
M&A.
We further require that households have no trading/holdings in the acquirer industry in the year
prior to the M&A announcement. We do so for two reasons. First, target investors that have prior
holdings in the acquirer industry could ―mechanically‖ sell their holdings upon receiving acquirer shares
to reduce their overall exposure to the acquirer industry. Second, we conjecture that target investors with
no prior trading/holdings in the acquirer industry are more likely to be ―shocked/treated‖ by the
endowment of shares in the acquirer industry.
The main independent variable in our regression equation is Target Investori,m, which equals one
if investor holds shares in the target firm in the month prior to the M&A announcement and zero
otherwise. Since we require that all investors have no trading/holdings in the acquirer industry prior to the
M&A, our analysis is essentially a difference-in-differences analysis and the coefficient estimate of
Target Investori,m indicates how much more intensely target investors trade in the acquirer industry in the

13

post-M&A period relative to the pre-M&A period, compared to the remaining investor population over
the same period.7
Our control variables fall into one of two groups: investor characteristics or ZIP Code
characteristics. The former include household income, number of children, number of family members,
age, gender, and marital status. The latter include ZIP Code population, fraction of male residents,
average home value, average number of household members, and average household income. In our full
specification, we also include M&A fixed effects to absorb any M&A-specific effects. The standard
errors are clustered at the ZIP Code- and the year-month-of-an-M&A-announcement levels.
The regression results are reported in Panel A of Table 2. The dependent variable in the
regressions for columns 1 – 3 is based on the number of trades, while that in the regressions for columns 4
– 6 is based on the dollar value of trades. Column 1, in which we report results when controlling for
investor and ZIP Code characteristics, shows that target investors increase their trading activity in the
acquirer industry by an incremental 2.53 percentage points compared to other investors (t-statistic = 5.38).
To put this number in perspective, the unconditional trading activity in any industry is 2.04 percentage
points. The endowment of acquirer stocks thus induces target investors to more than double their normal
trading activities in the average industry. As can be seen in columns 2 and 3, including M&A fixed effects
in the regressions has virtually no impact on our results. The coefficients in columns 4 – 6, which are
based on the dollar value of trades, are almost identical to those reported in columns 1 – 3.
Overall, the results in Table 2 support our assumption that the endowment of acquirer shares
induces at least some target investors to pay greater attention to the acquirer industry and trade more
actively in it.

4.2. Does increased trading activity in the acquirer industry spill over to target neighbors?
7

In other words, instead of Eq. (1), we could include observations in the one-year period prior to an M&A announcement and the
one-year period following M&A completion and estimate a regression of trading activity in the acquirer industry on a target
investor indicator variable and a post-M&A indicator variable, as well as an interaction term between the two indicator variables,
along with other controls and fixed effects. The estimate of the interaction term will be identical to our estimate of Target
Investori,m in Eq. (1).

14

Our second difference-in-differences analysis tests whether there is contagion in abnormal trading
activity in the acquirer industry from target investors to their neighbors. We use a narrow definition of
―neighbors‖—investors who live within a three-mile radius—as we presume that the likelihood of two
individuals coming into direct contact with each other rapidly diminishes with distance. We impose the
same data requirements as for target investors. That is, we exclude the acquirer firm when calculating
trading activity in the acquirer industry; we exclude dormant accounts; and we require that investors have
no trading/holdings in the acquirer industry in the prior year. In doing so, we can directly compare the
regression coefficients across the two settings. We estimate a regression equation similar to Eq. (1):
(2)
where Target Neighbori,m is an indicator variable that takes a value of one if investor i is not a target
investor and lives within three miles of a target investor. In additional tests, we replace our indicator
variable with the number of target investors who live within three miles of investor i. The results are
virtually unchanged (Online Appendix Table A1.1). The coefficient estimate of Target Neighbori,m
indicates how much more intensely investors residing within three miles of a target investor increase their
trading in the acquirer industry in the post-M&A period relative to the pre-M&A period, compared to all
other investors in our sample over the same time frame. To ensure that target investors do not enter our
counterfactuals, we exclude target investors from our sample when estimating Eq. (2).
The results of Eq. (2) are reported in Panel B of Table 2. When controlling for investor and ZIP
Code characteristics, we find that the number of trades increases by 46 bps more for investors who live
within three miles of a target investor (t-statistic = 6.57) than for investors who do not live within three
miles of a target investor. After adding M&A fixed effects, the coefficient estimate of Target Neighbori,m
turns to 22 bps (t-statistic = 3.14). The results based on the dollar value of trades are very similar. For
example, the coefficient estimate of Target Neighbori,m in the full specification is now 21 bps (t-statistic =
3.05).
The results reported in Online Appendix Table A1.2 show that target investors and their
neighbors tend to trade in the same direction; that is, if a target investor is buying in the acquirer industry,
15

so are her neighbors. Moreover, Online Appendix Table A1.3 shows that, on the extensive margin, about
one in ten target neighbors increase their trading activity after the M&A event. Combined with our results
in Panels A and B of Table 2 that the estimate of Target Investor is ten times larger in magnitude than the
estimate of Target Neighbor, our results on the extensive margin suggest that once ―infected,‖ target
neighbors exhibit similar levels of abnormal trading activity in the acquirer industry as target investors.8
If social interactions play a major role in generating our results, our effect should vary
substantially with our definition of neighbors. Panel A of Online Appendix Table A1.5 presents results
when we vary the distance over which we define neighbors. When we broaden our definition of neighbors
to investors who live between three and seven miles of a target investor, the coefficient estimate of Target
Neighbor in the full regression specification drops to 18 bps. When we increase the distance to between
seven and fifteen miles (15 and 30 miles), the coefficient estimate of Target Neighbor drops to 15 bps (2
bps). This rapid decrease in the coefficient estimates is consistent with social interactions playing a major
role in generating our results.
In additional analyses, we also experiment with the time period over which we measure investors’
trading activity. Specifically, instead of focusing on the one-year period after the estimated M&A
completion, that is, from months 7 through 18 after the M&A is announced, we expand our window to
years two and three. In short, M&As no longer have a discernible impact on target neighbors’ trading
activity in years two and three after M&A completion (Panel B in Online Appendix Table A1.5).
We believe that M&As are unlikely to be a function of similarities in backgrounds between target
investors and their neighbors. In addition, M&As are unlikely to reflect commonalities in preference or
taste, in particular given that our analysis focuses on retail investors. Our study is therefore less subject to
the aforementioned common shocks problem.
A critical reader might argue that our setting is still subject to a local media coverage concern:
local media coverage of a given M&A may happen to be disproportionally high in areas in which target

8

The results reported in Online Appendix Table A1.4 show that target neighbors significantly increase their trading activity not
only in the acquirer industry (excluding the acquirer firm) but also in the acquirer firm itself.

16

investors and their neighbors reside. This disproportionately high local media coverage could lead to
abnormally high trading activity in the acquirer industry without investors’ directly communicating with
one another.
Inconsistent with a simple local attention story, we observe little abnormal trading activity when
M&As are first announced. Instead, abnormal trading activity accrues only after target investors receive
shares of the acquirer firm (Panel C in Online Appendix Table A1.5).
We also conduct a placebo test around cross-industry cash-financed M&As. If, for some reason,
the media coverage of M&As is greater in areas with a greater concentration of target investors, we
should observe similar patterns around cash-financed M&As. In contrast, if our results are driven by the
endowment of acquirer shares generating word-of-mouth effects, we should observe no noticeable
patterns around cash-financed M&As. The results are reported in Table 3. Again, inconsistent with a
simple local attention story, the coefficient estimates of Target Investor are only one-fifth of those found
for stock-financed M&As and statistically not reliably different from zero. The coefficient estimates of
Target Neighbor are all close to zero.9 In robustness checks, we further exclude households in states
where the target or acquirer firm has any business operations identified using both headquarters and
factory locations and we continue to make similar observations.
Overall, we find strong evidence that the endowment of acquirer shares draws target investors’
attention to the corresponding acquirer industry and that elevated attention, in turn, increases trading
activity. We also find strong evidence that abnormal trading activity in the acquirer industry spills over
from target investors to their neighbors.10

5. The rate of communication

9

Online Appendix Table A1.6 reports the results of a second placebo test, the results of which again suggest that local media
coverage alone cannot generate the results we observe. Online Appendix Table A1.7 reports results, suggesting that our findings
also cannot be explained by investors’ plans to build exposure to the acquirer industry both directly and indirectly by purchasing
shares of the target firm in anticipation of the M&A.
10
In Online Appendix Tables A2.1–A2.5, we describe how the size of the spillover varies with (1) social characteristics of the
investors including measures of ―sociability,‖ length of residency, and population density, (2) levels of market uncertainty and
sentiment, (3) the presence of non-financial extraneous events (―distractions‖), and (4) M&A deal characteristics.

17

To estimate the rate of communication for our particular type of financial information and to
study how much the rate varies with the characteristics of the underlying investor population, we propose
a ―dynamic‖ estimation procedure drawn from studies that examine the contagion rate of diseases
(Kermack and McKendrick, 1927, 1932).
Fig. 2 contrasts our previous ―simple‖ difference-in-differences analysis in Section 4 with our
new ―dynamic‖ estimation procedure. Each dot represents an investor in the neighborhood. Dark dots
represent investors with abnormal trading in the acquirer industry; gray dots represent investors with no
such abnormal trading activity. Investor 1 is a target investor.
Our difference-in-differences analysis in Section 4 captures the degree to which target neighbors
become ―infected‖ over a given period of time. The difference-in-differences analysis cannot capture
whether any such ―infection‖ is coming straight from the target investor or another ―infected‖ neighbor.
For instance, in Panel A, it is unclear whether Investor 5 becomes ―infected‖ through Investor 1 or
whether abnormal trading in the acquirer industry first spills over from Investor 1 to Investors 2 and 4,
who, in turn, infect Investor 5.
If the goal is to establish that financial information is contagious, such differentiation is not
material. However, such differentiation becomes crucial when trying to estimate the rate of
communication and the degree to which the rate varies with the characteristics of the sender and receiver
of the information because, for that, we need to know—at any given point—who the sender is and who
the receiver is. In subsection 5.1 we describe our attempt to track how trading activity in the acquirer
industry percolates from investor to investor, as illustrated in Panel B of Fig. 2.

5.1. Methodology
Following the completion of each cross-industry stock-financed M&A, we estimate a
transmission matrix that quantifies how views and opinions percolate through the investor population
from one period to the next. We then examine how the pairwise communication rate from investor j (the

18

sender) to investor i (the receiver) varies with characteristics of both investors. Specifically, we estimate
the following transmission matrix with K investors:

(3)
(

)

) (

(

)

where Xi,t is the abnormal trading activity of investor i in the acquirer industry in period t and Xi,t+1 is her
trading activity in the acquirer industry in period t+1. The diagonal terms, βi,i, capture the persistence in
investor i’s trading behavior. For simplicity, we assume that the persistence is a constant for all investors.
The off-diagonal terms, βi,j, capture how much trading in the acquirer industry spills over from investor j
to investor i. In vector form and over p periods, we have:

...

(4)
.

The advantage of the dynamic setting is that it enables us to explicitly and dynamically account for ―thirdparty ties.‖ That is, our setting allows for the possibility that the view of investor j is transmitted to
investor i through a third party (or a chain of third parties) without being in direct contact with investor i,
which, in turn, enables us to quantify how the social distance between any two investors affects the
communication rate between these two investors. Compounding the transmission matrix in (4) over p
periods, we have:
(5)
where is the M&A completion date and

is the number of periods after the completion of the M&A.

If the set of

s satisfied the exogeneity condition, we could simply estimate a vector auto-

regression based on

by stacking our observations both across M&As and across

periods within each M&A event. Of course, the exogeneity condition does not hold in our setting. We
19

therefore instrument the right-hand side in each of these equations by the initial portfolio shocks induced
by the cross-industry stock-financed M&As. In other words, we jointly estimate the following set of
equations:
̂
̂
(6)
̂

where ̂ is the instrumented trading activity in the acquirer industry immediately after M&A completion.
Estimating this set of equations is computationally challenging as the set contains powers of an
unknown 70,000 × 70,000 matrix (we have roughly 70,000 investors in our sample). To get around this
technical complexity, we employ a three-stage approach.
In our first stage, we instrument the set of

s using portfolio shocks experienced by target

investors at the M&A completion date. Specifically, we estimate regression equations of investor ’s
trading activity in the acquirer industry in each period t+p on Target Investori, which equals one if
investor is a target investor and zero otherwise. Trading activity in the acquirer industry is the total
number (or total dollar value) of trades in the acquirer industry (excluding the acquirer firm), divided by
the total number (or total dollar value) of trades across all industries.
In the second stage, we estimate how trading activity in the acquirer industry in period t+p (

)

relates to the fitted trading activity in the acquirer industry in the previous period t+p-1 ( ̂ ),
calculated from the first-stage regression:
̂

̂

̂

̂

̂

̂
20

(7)

If we were to stop here, our estimates of the

matrix would be unbiased (to the extent that our

instruments are exogenous). However, we lose efficiency as we do not impose the following condition in
the estimation: ̂

̂

̂

In our third stage, we improve the efficiency of our estimates of the
method. Specifically, in each iteration, we use the

matrix using a recursive

matrix estimated from the previous round to re-

estimate a new set of ̂ s. That is, we start with the instrumented ̂ and then calculate ̂
̂

̂,

̂ , etc. We then re-estimate Eq. (7) using ̂ , ̂ , ..., ̂ to derive a new . We

initialize the process with the

matrix estimated from the second stage and stop the process when we

find a fixed point for .
To reduce computational complexity, we impose two restrictions. First, for each M&A event, we
track only the trading activity of investors who live within a 30-mile radius of a target investor. This
restriction is motived by our earlier result that there is negligible contagion between investors residing
more than 15 miles away from any target investor. Second, we set βi,j in the transmission matrix to zero if
the distance between investors i and j is greater than three miles. That is, we assume that direct
communication takes place only if the two investors live sufficiently close to one another.
Finally, in our estimation, we define each period as one quarter, as the average retail investor in
our sample trades once a quarter. We study the four quarters after each M&A completion, so p ranges
from 1 to 4. We restrict ourselves to four quarters as we find in our earlier difference-in-differences
analysis that M&As no longer have a discernible impact on target neighbors’ trading activity in years two
and three after M&A completion. Again, trading in the acquirer industry is based either on the number of
trades or the dollar value of trades.

5.2. The overall rate of communication
In our baseline estimation, we assume that βi,j is a constant for all investor-pairs. For ease of
interpretation, in our estimation we aggregate all neighbors of investor i into a representative ―average‖
21

neighbor j. For example, if only one of the K neighbors of investor i is ―infected,‖ the representative
neighbor would have a value of 1/K. We then estimate the overall communication rate from this
representative neighbor j to investor i.
Given our earlier finding that once ―infected,‖ investors exhibit similar levels of abnormal trading
activity in the acquirer industry as ―patient zero,‖ we can interpret our communication rate as the
probability that investor i becomes ―infected‖ in the next period if all neighbors are ―infected.‖ If only one
of the K neighbors is ―infected,‖ the probability that investor i becomes ―infected‖ in the next period is
simply our communication rate multiplied by 1/K.
Alternatively, we can think of the communication rate as reflecting the average number of new
―infections‖ generated by a single ―infective‖ investor in the neighborhood, akin to the reproduction
number in the epidemiology literature. Consider again the case in which only one of the K investors in the
neighborhood is ―infected.‖ The expected number of new infections—out of the K investors—naturally is
the product of the number of investors, K, and the probability that any one of the ―susceptible‖ investors
becomes ―infected,‖ which, as described in the preceding paragraph, is simply our communication rate
multiplied by 1/K. In other words, the expected number of new ―infections‖ generated by a single
―infective‖ investor is simply our communication rate.
We report the results in Panel A of Table 4. As shown in column 1, if trading is measured through
the number of trades, our estimate of the overall rate of communication is 0.32 with a 95% confidence
interval of 0.17 to 0.46. If trading is measured through the dollar value of trades (column 6), our estimate
becomes 0.34 with a 95% confidence interval of 0.17 to 0.50. Our results suggest that one ―infected‖
investor, on average, ―infects‖ 0.32 or 0.34 neighbors. That is, financial information is contagious. At the
same time, since all our estimates are substantially below one, we can infer that any contagion dies out on
its own without intervention. Our results perhaps agree with casual observations that financial information
is rarely so contagious that it triggers an outright ―epidemic.‖

5.3. Variation tied to differences in age, income, and gender
22

In our next analysis, we consider how much the communication rate varies with distances in
investor characteristics. To facilitate the computation of the transmission matrix, we impose a linear
structure on the off-diagonal terms, βi,j. That is, we conjecture that the change in communication rate
between any two investors i and j is a linear function of the distances in investor characteristics.
Specifically, we assume that βi,j is a function of the absolute differences in age, income, and gender:

(

)

(8)

where εi,j captures unobserved determinants of βi,j and b0 reflects the communication rate with all social
distances set to zero. Scaling our estimates of b1, b2, and b3 by our estimate of b0 yields the percentage
change in the communication rate as a function of social distances. As before, we take the average of all
nearby investors to i and calculate the rate of communication from this representative neighbor to investor
i. The coefficient estimate for b0 can thus be interpreted as the analog of the reproduction number when
all social distances are set to zero; the estimates b1, b2, and b3 measure variations in the zero-socialdistance communication rate. For consistency, we employ the same estimation procedure for all
subsequent tests discussed in this section.
We report the results in Panel B of Table 4. Several observations are worth noting. First, as
shown in columns 5 and 10, our estimates of b0 are 0.470 (t-statistic = 5.22) and 0.487 (t-statistic = 6.01)
depending on whether we consider the number of trades or the dollar value of trades. That is, when all
social distances are set to zero, the communication rate rises from its previous 0.32 and 0.34 to 0.47 and
0.49, respectively.
Second, when considering the number of trades, the estimates of b1, b2, and b3 are -0.004, -0.012,
and -0.056, respectively. All estimates are statistically significant at the 1% level. Our estimates suggest
that a ten-year difference in age, a one-category difference in income, and being of another gender lowers
the communication rate by 0.04, 0.012, and 0.056, or, by 9%, 3%, and 12%, respectively.11 In other words,

11

The calculations are as follows: 9% (= (10*0.004)/0.470), 3% (= 0.012/0.470), and 12% (=0.056/0.470).

23

age and gender represent higher barriers to communication than differences in economic backgrounds.
The results are similar when considering the dollar value of trades.12
Since our empirical design allows us to pinpoint the sender and the receiver, we can assess
whether the communication rate varies asymmetrically with differences in social characteristics. That is,
we can examine whether the communication rate differs between (1) the sender’s being ten years younger
than the receiver and (2) the sender’s being ten years older than the receiver. Empirically, instead of
estimating one slope for the absolute distance in a social characteristic, we now estimate two slopes: one
for ―positive differences‖ and another for ―negative differences.‖ Positive differences denote cases in
which the receiver is older than the sender, the receiver has higher income than the sender, and the
receiver is male and the sender is female. Negative differences denote cases in which the receiver is
younger than the sender, the receiver has lower income than the sender, and the receiver is female and the
sender is male.
The results, presented in column 1 of Table 5, show that, when considering the number of trades,
the estimates of |Agei – Agej|+ and |Agei – Agej|– are -0.006 and -0.003, respectively. These estimates are
statistically different from each other at the 1% level. To interpret these estimates, consider a sender who
is 40 years old. The communication rate is maximized if the receiver is also 40 years old. Our estimates
suggest that if the receiver is older than the sender, the communication rate declines by 0.006 per oneyear age gap. If the receiver is younger than the sender, the communication rate declines by 0.003. That is,
the communication rate declines more slowly when the receiver is younger than the sender. We can thus
infer that, relatively speaking, younger investors are more likely to act on older investors’ views than the
other way around. The results are similar when considering the dollar value of trades.
Applying the same logic to income and gender, we find that, relatively speaking, lower-income
investors are slightly more likely to act on higher-income investors’ views than vice versa and that male
investors are more likely to act on female investors’ views than female investors are to male investors’
views. One possible explanation of these asymmetries is that investors perceive information conveyed by
12

Online Appendix Tables A3.1 and A3.2 present the results of various robustness checks.

24

older, wealthier, female investors as more credible and, thus, are more likely to act on any views
transmitted by such investors.

5.4. Variation tied to investors’ recent trading performances
We next examine how communication rates vary with senders’ and receivers’ recent trading
performances. Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012), Heimer and Simon (2015), and Escobar and Pedraza (2019)
find evidence that investors are more likely to share their investment experiences when their portfolios
have performed well. Our dynamic setting allows us to quantify the performance effects of both senders
and receivers.
For each M&A event, we sort investors into halves based on their recent investment
performances in the year prior to the M&A announcement. Investment performances are either portfolio
returns in excess of the risk-free rate or market-adjusted portfolio returns. We then estimate the following
linear function:
(

)

(9)

where IHH is an indicator variable that equals one if both the sender and receiver belong to the ―highperforming‖ group and zero otherwise; ILH is an indicator variable that equals one if the receiver belongs
to the ―low-performing‖ group and the sender belongs to the ―high-performing‖ group and zero otherwise;
and IHL is an indicator variable that equals one if the receiver belongs to the ―high-performing‖ group and
the sender belongs to the ―low-performing‖ group and zero otherwise. The counterfactual represents cases
in which both the sender and the receiver reside in the low-performing group.
Below, we discuss the results when considering the number of trades and measuring performance
as the portfolio return in excess of the risk-free rate. We arrive at the same conclusions when considering
the dollar value of trades and market-adjusted portfolio returns.

25

The results presented in Table 6 show that the communication rate is the lowest, 0.289, when
both the sender and the receiver reside in the low-performing group. The communication rate is the
highest, 0.439 (= 0.289 + 0.150), when both investors reside in the high-performing group.
When there is a performance wedge between the sender and the receiver, we see an asymmetric
effect. The coefficient estimate of ILH suggests that when the receiver is in the low-performing group and
the sender is in the high-performing group, the pairwise communication rate is 0.371 (= 0.289 + 0.082).
In comparison, the coefficient estimate of IHL suggests that when the receiver is in the high-performing
group and the sender is in the low-performing group, the communication rate is 0.324 (= 0.289 + 0.035).
The difference between 0.371 and 0.324 is significant, both economically and statistically, and suggests
that investors with poor investment records are more likely to act on high-performing investors’ views
than the other way around. This asymmetry echoes our earlier suggestion that investors are more likely to
act on views transmitted by investors seen as more competent and knowledgeable.
The results reported in Table 6 show clearly that the communication rate is a function of not only
the sender’s recent performance but also the receiver’s. The economic significance of the receiver’s effect
is substantial. Specifically, the difference in the communication rate between (1) pairs in which both
investors are in the high-performing group and (2) pairs in which the sender is in the high-performing
group and the receiver is in the low-performing group is 0.07 (0.439 – 0.371 = 0.068). Compared to the
estimates reported in Table 4, a 0.07 drop in the communication rate is equivalent to a drop in the
communication rate generated by an 18-year age gap or a seven-category difference in income; it is larger
than a drop generated by a difference in gender.
Overall, we make the novel observation that the communication rate strengthens not only with the
recent investment performance of the sender but also with that of the receiver. The economic significance
of this effect is substantial. One possible explanation is that receivers avoid discussing investment ideas
when their portfolios have performed poorly, as any such discussion would re-access the negative
emotions tied to their recent investment failures. We also uncover another asymmetry: investors with poor
investment records are more likely to act on high-performing investors’ views than the other way around.
26

5.5. Variation tied to differences in lifestyle and geography
Our final set of characteristics relate to similarities (or differences) in lifestyle and state of
residence. We capture similarity in lifestyle through (1) same-type-of-unique-vehicle ownership and (2)
same marital or parental status. In particular, we consider whether both the sender and the receiver own a
truck (or not), an RV (or not), or a motorcycle (or not). We also consider whether the sender and the
receiver have the same marital status (married or single) or the same parental status (with children or
without children). Our data coverage for vehicle ownership and for marital and parental status is sparse.
Our results in this subsection should thus be interpreted with caution.
As shown in Online Appendix Tables A3.3 and A3.4, we find that the communication rate is
highest when the sender and the receiver own the same type of unique vehicle. If the sender owns a truck
and the receiver does not, or, if the receiver owns a truck and the sender does not, the communication rate
drops by around 0.11. The corresponding declines for RVs and motorcycles are around 0.09 and 0.07,
respectively.
We detect no variation tied to differences in marital or parental status. One interpretation of this
non-result is that when initiating and reciprocating on investment-related conversations, investors do not
discriminate based on marital or parental status. The alternative perspective is that, given the sparsity in
data coverage, our tests lack power.13
To examine the communication rate by state of residence, we estimate state fixed effects in the
communication rate after controlling for observable social characteristics. In Figs. 3 and 4, we plot the
average communication rate by state. Online Appendix Table A3.5 reports the data used to create Figs. 3
and 4. We observe strong regional differences. The Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between our
communication rate based on the number of trades (dollar value of trades) and a state-level measure of

13

The data coverage for marital and parental status is lower than that for vehicle ownership.

27

sociability drawn from Putnam (2000)14 is as high as 0.39 (0.43), suggesting that financial information is
more contagious in regions in which individuals are more sociable.15

6. Dissemination of value-relevant information or merely spreading noise?
Do investors in our setting transmit unique and value-relevant news or simply spread noise? If
any newly acquired views about the acquirer industry transmitted through social interactions represent
unique and value-relevant information, the stocks bought by target investors and their neighbors in the
acquirer industry (―long leg‖) should subsequently outperform the stocks sold by target investors and
their neighbors in the acquirer industry (―short leg‖). On the other hand, if the views about the acquirer
industry represent mere noise, we should observe no performance differential between the long leg and
the short leg.
We experiment with three portfolio construction schemes: (1) For each stock in the acquirer
industry traded by target investors and their neighbors from months 7 through 18 after the M&A is
announced, we compute the total number of shares bought by target investors and their neighbors minus
the total number of shares sold. The long leg contains stocks of which target investors and their neighbors
are net buyers; the short leg contains stocks of which they are net sellers. The long and short legs are
weighted by the net total number of shares that are bought (sold) across target investors and their
neighbors and are held for one month. (2) We repeat the above exercise but now consider the dollar value
of shares rather than the number of shares. (3) For each stock in the acquirer industry traded by target
investors and their neighbors from months 7 through 18 after the M&A is announced, we compute the
average change in a stock’s weight in the portfolios of target investors and their neighbors. The long leg
contains stocks that experience a weight increase; the short leg contains stocks that experience a decrease.

14

Putnam (2000) surveys individuals regarding the frequency with which they visit their friends. The state-level measure of
sociability is a variable ranging from 1 through 6 indicating how strongly people agree with the statement that they spend a lot of
time visiting friends (6 being definitely agree and 1 being definitely disagree).
15
Ivković and Weisbenner (2007) and Brown, Ivković, Smith, and Weisbenner (2008) make a similar suggestion.

28

The long and short legs are weighted by the corresponding stock’s portfolio weight change, and they are
held again for one month.
The results are reported in Table 7. Regardless of the portfolio construction scheme, we find that
the long leg underperforms the short leg, albeit not statistically significantly so. These results do not
support the notion that newly acquired views about firms in the acquirer industry reflect value-relevant
information. Our results are similar to the observations made by Hvide and Östberg (2015), who also find
evidence that financial information transmitted through social interactions does not improve investors’
trading performances.

7. Conclusion
In this paper, we identify cross-industry stock-financed M&As as a series of plausibly exogenous
shocks, which cause target investors to trade abnormally in the acquirer industry. We then trace the
contagion of abnormal trading activity from the target investors to their neighbors and their neighbors’
neighbors. We use our setting to provide causal evidence that financial information is contagious. We also
produce novel estimates of how contagious financial information is and how much such contagiousness
varies with investor characteristics.
For our sample of US retail investors from 1991 to 1996, we find that one ―infected‖ investor, on
average, ―infects‖ 0.32 neighbors with opinions formed about the acquirer industry. The transmission is
stronger when the sender of financial information and the receiver have had recent investment successes.
To a smaller, yet, still meaningful degree, the transmission is also stronger when there are few differences
in age, income, gender, or lifestyle between the sender and the receiver. When comparing the relative
importance of differences in age, income, and gender in slowing down transmission, we find that
differences in age and gender represent much higher barriers to information transmission than differences
in income. Moreover, transmission from older, high-income, female investors to younger, low-income,
male investors is stronger than transmission in the reverse direction.

29

Most traditional models in economics and finance assume that people operate in a social vacuum.
As the evidence on the relevance of social interactions accumulates, recent theoretical work has begun to
incorporate social interactions into equilibrium models of economic decision making, a trend that is likely
going to continue if not accelerate (Kuchler and Stroebel, 2020). We believe that the estimates reported in
this study can help inform theorists as they integrate social interactions into their models. On a more
practical level, we believe that our estimates can help guide the design of public policy and information
campaigns.

30

References
Anderson, R., 1982. Directly transmitted viral and bacterial infections of man. In: Anderson, R. (Ed.), The
Population Dynamics of Infectious Diseases: Theory and Applications. Springer, Boston, pp.1-37.
Anderson, R., May, R., 1982. Directly transmitted infectious diseases: control by vaccination. Science
215, 1053-1060.
Anderson, R., May, R., 1985. Vaccination and herd immunity to infectious diseases. Nature 318, 323329.
Anderson, M., Magruder, J., 2012. Learning from the crowd: regression discontinuity estimates of the
effects of an online review database. Economic Journal 122, 957-989.
Banerjee, A., Chandrasekhar, A., Duflo, E., Jackson, M., 2019. Using gossips to spread information:
theory and evidence from two randomized controlled trials. Review of Economic Studies 86, 2453-2490.
Barber, B., Odean, T., 2001. Boys will be boys: gender, overconfidence, and common stock investment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261-292.
Berger, J., 2014. Word of mouth and interpersonal communication: a review and directions for future
research. Journal of Consumer Psychology 24, 586-607.
Berger, J., 2016. Contagious: Why Things Catch On. Simon and Schuster, New York.
Brown, J., Ivković, Z., Smith, P., Weisbenner, S., 2008. Neighbors matter: causal community effects and
stock market participation. Journal of Finance 63, 1509-1531.
Cao, Z., Zhang, Q., Lu, X., Pfeiffer, D., Jia, Z., Song, H., Zeng, D., 2020. Estimating the effective
reproduction number of the 2019-nCoV in China. MedRxiv, doi: 10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952v1.
Chen, H., Hwang, B., 2020. Listening in on investors’ thoughts and conversations. Unpublished working
paper. University of Hong Kong and NTU.
Delamater, P., Street, E., Leslie, T., Yang, Y., Jacobsen, K., 2019. Complexity of the basic reproduction
number (R0). Emerging Infectious Diseases 25, 1.
Doucleff, M., 2014. No, Seriously, How Contagious Is Ebola. Public Health, National Public Radio, URL
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2014/10/02/352983774/no-seriously-how-contagious-is-ebola
(accessed 07.30.2020).
Duflo, E., Saez, E., 2003. The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan decisions:
evidence from a randomized experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 815-842.
Escobar, L., Pedraza, A., 2019. Active trading and (poor) performance: the social transmission channel.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.8767.
Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy, A., et al., 2020. Report 13 - Estimating the number of infections and the
impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries. Imperial College
London, doi: 10.25561/77731.
Giglio, S., Shue, K., 2014. No news is news: Do markets underreact to nothing? Review of Financial
Studies 27, 3389-3440.
31

Guerra, F., Bolotin, S., Lim, G., Heffernan, J., Deeks, S., Li, Y., Crowcroft, N., 2017. The basic
reproduction number (R0) of measles: a systematic review. Lancet Infectious Diseases 17, e420-e428.
Han, B., Hirshleifer, D., Walden, J., forthcoming. Social transmission bias and investor behavior. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
Heesterbeek, J., 2002. A brief history of R0 and a recipe for its calculation. Acta Biotheoretica 50, 189204.
Heffernan, J., Smith, R., Wahl, L., 2005. Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio. Journal of the
Royal Society Interface 2, 281-293.
Heimer, R., Simon, D., 2015. Facebook finance: How social interaction propagates active investing.
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper No. 15-22.
Hirshleifer, D., 2020. Presidential address: social transmission bias in economics and finance. Journal of
Finance 75, 1779-1831.
Hong, H., Kubik, J., Stein, J., 2005. Thy neighbor's portfolio: word‐of‐mouth effects in the holdings and
trades of money managers. Journal of Finance 60, 2801-2824.
Hvide, H., Östberg, P., 2015. Social interaction at work. Journal of Financial Economics 117, 628-652.
Ivković, Z., Weisbenner, S., 2007. Information diffusion effects in individual investors' common stock
purchases: covet thy neighbors' investment choices. Review of Financial Studies 20, 1327-1357.
Jackson, M., 2014. Networks in the understanding of economic behaviors. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 28, 3-22.
Jackson, M., 2019. The Human Network: How Your Social Position Determines Your Power, Beliefs,
and Behaviors. Pantheon Books, New York.
Kaustia, M., Knüpfer, S., 2012. Peer performance and stock market entry. Journal of Financial Economics
104, 321-338.
Keeling, M., Grenfell, B., 2000. Individual-based perspectives on R0. Journal of Theoretical Biology 203,
51-61.
Kermack, W., McKendrick, A., 1927. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, containing papers of a mathematical and physical
character 115, 700-721.
Kermack, W., McKendrick, A., 1932. Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics. II.—The
problem of endemicity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, containing papers of a
mathematical and physical character 138, 55-83.
Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., forthcoming. Social finance. Annual Review of Financial Economics.
Lazarsfeld, P., Merton, R., 1954. Friendship as a social process: a substantive and methodological
analysis. Freedom and Control in Modern Society 18, 18-66.
Lerner, J., Malmendier, U., 2013. With a little help from my (random) friends: success and failure in postbusiness school entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies 26, 2411-2452.

32

Lovett, M., Peres, R., Shachar, R. , 2013. On brands and word of mouth. Journal of Marketing Research
50, 427-444.
Manski, C., 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem. Review of
Economic Studies 60, 531-542.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., Cook, J., 2001. Birds of a feather: homophily in social networks.
Annual Review of Sociology 27, 415-444.
Mitchell, M., Pulvino, T., 2001. Characteristics of risk and return in risk arbitrage. Journal of Finance 56,
2135-2175.
Odean, T., 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance 53, 1775-1798.
Putnam, R., 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. Simon and
Schuster, New York.
Shiller, R., 2017. Narrative economics. American Economic Review 107, 967-1004.
Shiller, R., Pound, J., 1989. Survey evidence on diffusion of interest and information among investors.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 12, 47-66.
Shue, K., 2013. Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assignment of MBA
peers. Review of Financial Studies 26, 1401-1442.

33

Table 1
Summary statistics.
This table reports summary statistics for our various samples. Panel A presents statistics for the M&A sample.
Stock-financed M&As are deals that are at least partially equity-financed; cash-financed M&As comprise 100%
cash-financed deals. Firm size is the number of shares outstanding multiplied by the share price as of the month
prior to an M&A. All observations are at the M&A level. Panel B shows investor and portfolio characteristics for
our retail investor sample. We require that investors place at least one trade in either the one-year period prior to the
M&A or the one-year period following the M&A. We further require that these households have no trading/holdings
in the acquirer industry prior to the M&A announcement. Portfolio size is the dollar value of the stock holdings.
Investor income is the annual income of the primary account holder. Investor gender is an indicator variable that
equals one for male and zero for female. All observations are at the account/year-month level. Panel C shows
demographic information for each ZIP Code included in our sample. All observations are at the ZIP Code/yearmonth level.
N

25%

Median

75%

Mean

Std. Dev.

Acquirer Firm Size ($million)

316

216

952

2,969

2,754

5,503

Target Firm Size ($million)

316

31

72

250

654

2,396

Acquirer Firm Size ($million)

143

391

1,561

4,491

5,541

12,970

Target Firm Size ($million)

143

30

93

216

266

585

Portfolio Size ($)

70,608

5,513

13,141

31,818

41,030

216,539

Number of Stocks Held

70,608

1.00

2.00

5.00

3.88

5.03

Number of Trades Each Month

70,608

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.47

1.76

Value of Trades Each Month ($)

70,608

0

0

0

5,679

76,056

Investor Age

70,608

36.00

46.00

56.00

42.02

21.44

Investor Income ($)

70,608

45,000

62,500

87,500

69,500

30,064

Investor Gender

70,608

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.90

0.30

Population

42,057

785

2,777

11,960

8,965

13,134

No. Household Members

42,057

2.40

2.56

2.73

2.59

0.35

House Value ($)

42,057

58,200

82,900

122,300

105,359

89,589

Household Income ($)

42,057

29,779

36,250

45,750

39,631

16,243

Panel A: M&A characteristics
Stock-Financed M&As

Cash-Financed M&As

Panel B: Investor/Portfolio characteristics

Panel C: ZIP Code characteristics
Basic Characteristics

34

Table 2
Trading in the acquirer industry after stock-financed M&As.
This table reports coefficient estimates from regressions of investor trading in the acquirer industry on a target
investor indicator variable (Panel A) or a target neighbor indicator variable (Panel B). The observations are at the
M&A/brokerage account/year-month level. We consider cross-industry stock-financed M&As only. The dependent
variable in the regressions for columns 1-3 is the number of trades in the acquirer industry (excluding the acquirer
firm) as a fraction of the total number of trades across all industries in months 7 through 18 after the M&A is
announced. The dependent variable in the regressions for columns 4-6 is the dollar value of trades in the acquirer
industry (excluding the acquirer firm) as a fraction of the total dollar value of trades across all industries in months 7
through 18 after the M&A is announced. We examine total trading behavior in months 7 through 18 after the M&A
is announced since the exact completion date is missing for many M&As, and as, on average, it takes six months for
an M&A to be completed (Giglio and Shue, 2014). Target Investor is an indicator variable, which equals one if an
investor possesses shares of the target stock at the end of the month prior to the M&A announcement. Target
Neighbor is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if an investor lives within three miles of a target investor
and is not a target investor herself. Investor-level controls include the account holder’s income, number of children,
number of family members, age, gender, and marital status. ZIP Code level controls include the ZIP Code
population, fraction of male residents, average home value, average number of household members, and average
household income. Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the ZIP Code and the year-month-of-anM&A-announcement level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
# Trades
(1)

$ Trades

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Target investors’ trading in the acquirer industry
0.0253***
(0.0047)

0.0233***
(0.0048)

0.0232***
(0.0048)

0.0227***
(0.0045)

0.0208***
(0.0047)

0.0208***
(0.0047)

Investor Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

Zip Code Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

M&A Fixed Effects

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

Adj. R

0.01%

1.65%

1.65%

0.01%

1.58%

1.59%

# Obs.

7,580,930

7,580,930

7,580,930

7,580,930

7,580,930

7,580,930

Target Investor

2

Panel B: Target neighbors’ trading in the acquirer industry
Target Neighbor

0.0046***
(0.0007)

0.0020***
(0.0007)

0.0022***
(0.0007)

0.0043***
(0.0008)

0.0018***
(0.0007)

0.0021***
(0.0007)

Investor Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

Zip Code Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

M&A Fixed Effects

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

Adj. R

0.01%

1.65%

1.65%

0.01%

1.58%

1.59%

# Obs.

7,578,642

7,578,642

7,578,642

7,578,642

7,578,642

7,578,642

2

35

Table 3
Trading in the acquirer industry after cash-financed M&As: Placebo.
This table reports coefficient estimates from regressions of investor trading in the acquirer industry on a target
investor indicator variable (Panel A) or a target neighbor indicator variable (Panel B). The regressions are identical
to those in Table 2 except for that we now estimate regressions on a sample of cross-industry cash-financed M&As.
Standard errors, shown in parentheses, are clustered at the ZIP Code and the year-month-of-an-M&A-announcement
level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
# Trades
(1)

$ Trades

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Target investors’ trading in the acquirer industry
0.0047
(0.0037)

0.0043
(0.0035)

0.0043
(0.0035)

0.0061
(0.0042)

0.0059
(0.0040)

0.0059
(0.0040)

Investor Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

Zip Code Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

M&A Fixed Effects

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

Adj. R

0.01%

2.36%

2.37%

0.01%

2.25%

2.25%

# Obs.

3,489,774

3,489,774

3,489,774

3,489,774

3,489,774

3,489,774

Target Investor

2

Panel B: Target neighbors’ trading in the acquirer industry
Target Neighbor

0.0017
(0.0012)

-0.0001
(0.0010)

0.0003
(0.0010)

0.0016
(0.0012)

-0.0002
(0.0010)

0.0003
(0.0010)

Investor Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

Zip Code Controls

YES

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

M&A Fixed Effects

NO

YES

YES

NO

YES

YES

Adj. R

0.01%

2.36%

2.37%

0.01%

2.25%

2.25%

# Obs.

3,489,054

3,489,054

3,489,054

3,489,054

3,489,054

3,489,054

2

36

Table 4
Overall communication rate and variation in communication rate tied to differences in investor characteristics.
This table reports the results of a three-stage estimation of a transmission matrix. The estimation procedure is detailed in Section 5. In essence, we assess how
trading activity in the acquirer industry percolates across investors from quarter to quarter (Panel A) and how any such ―contagion rate‖ varies with differences in
income, age and gender between the sender of acquirer-industry information and the receiver of acquirer-industry information (Panel B). The dependent variable
is investor i’s actual trading in quarter t+1. ̂ i,t is investor i’s own instrumented trading in quarter t; ̂ j,t is the average instrumented trading across
neighboring investors j in quarter t. Bootstrapped standard errors are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
# Trades
(1)

(2)

(3)

$ Trades
（4）

（5）

(6)

(7)

(8)

（9）

（10）

Panel A: Overall communication rate
̂

i,t

0.598***
(0.076)

0.575***
(0.080)

̂

j,t

0.315***
(0.076)

0.335***
(0.082)

2,076,790

2,076,790

# Obs.

Panel B: Communication rate and differences in investor characteristics
̂

i,t

0.535***
(0.075)

0.560***
(0.061)

0.620***
(0.080)

0.556***
(0.083)

0.513***
(0.070)

0.542***
(0.088)

0.599***
(0.066)

0.539***
(0.072)

̂

j,t

0.449***
(0.082)

0.385***
(0.060)

0.307***
(0.080)

0.470***
(0.090)

0.472***
(0.074)

0.399***
(0.092)

0.326***
(0.067)

0.487***
(0.081)

̂

j,t

× |Agei-Agej|

-0.004***
(0.001)

-0.005***
(0.001)

̂

j,t

× |Incomei-Incomej|

̂

j,t

× |Genderi-Genderj|

# Obs.

-0.005***
(0.001)
-0.017***
(0.005)

2,076,790

2,076,790

-0.012***
(0.005)
-0.064***
(0.017)

-0.056***
(0.018)

2,076,790

2,076,790

37

-0.005***
(0.001)
-0.017***
(0.005)

2,076,790

2,076,790

-0.011***
(0.004)
-0.068***
(0.016)

-0.060***
(0.018)

2,076,790

2,076,790

Table 5
Variation in communication rate tied to differences in investor characteristics: asymmetries.
This table reports the results of a three-stage estimation of a transmission matrix. The estimation procedure is
detailed in Section 5. The estimation procedure is identical to that for Table 4 except for that we now allow for
differences in age, income, and gender to have a differential impact on the communication rate depending on
whether the receiver of financial information is older, or younger than the sender of financial information; whether
the receiver has higher income, or lower income than the sender; and whether the receiver is male and the sender is
female, or the receiver is female and the sender is male. ―Positive differences‖ below denote cases in which the
receiver is older than the sender, the receiver has higher income than the sender, and the receiver is male and the
sender is female. ―Negative differences‖ below denote cases in which the receiver is younger than the sender, the
receiver has lower income than the sender, and the receiver is female and the sender is male. Bootstrapped standard
errors are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
# Trades
(1)

$ Trades
(2)

̂

i,t

0.480***
(0.058)

0.463***
(0.082)

̂

j,t

0.516***
(0.062)

0.534***
(0.086)

̂

j,t

× |Agei-Agej|+

-0.006***
(0.001)

-0.007***
(0.001)

̂

j,t

× |Agei-Agej|--

-0.003***
(0.001)

-0.003***
(0.001)

̂

j,t

× |Incomei-Incomej|+

-0.018***
(0.007)

-0.017***
(0.006)

̂

j,t

× |Incomei-Incomej|--

-0.016***
(0.005)

-0.015***
(0.005)

̂

j,t

× |Genderi-Genderj|+

-0.018
(0.046)

-0.024
(0.043)

̂

j,t

× |Genderi-Genderj|--

-0.091***
(0.016)

-0.097***
(0.017)

2,076,790

2,076,790

# Obs.

38

Table 6
Variation in communication rate tied to investors’ past trading performances.
This table reports the results of a three-stage estimation of a transmission matrix. The estimation procedure is
detailed in Section 5. In essence, we assess how trading activity in the acquirer industry percolates across investors
from quarter to quarter and how any such ―contagion rate‖ varies with recent trading performances of the sender of
financial information and the receiver of financial information. The dependent variable is investor i’s actual trading
in quarter t+1. ̂ i,t is investor i’s own instrumented trading in quarter t; ̂ j,t is the average instrumented
trading across neighboring investors j in quarter t. In columns 1 and 3, investors’ recent trading performances are the
raw portfolio returns in excess of the risk-free rate in the year prior to the M&A announcement. In columns 2 and 4,
investors’ recent trading performances are the market-adjusted portfolio returns in the year prior to the M&A
announcement. For each M&A event, we divide all investors into halves based on their recent trading performance.
IHH is an indicator variable, which equals one if both sender and receiver belong to the high-performing group, and
zero otherwise. ILH is an indicator variable, which equals one if the sender belongs to the high-performing group and
the receiver belongs to the low-performing group, and zero otherwise. IHL is an indicator variable, which equals one
if the receiver belongs to the high-performing group and the sender belongs to the low-performing group, and zero
otherwise. The counterfactual represents cases in which both the sender and the receiver reside in the lowperforming group. Bootstrapped standard errors are shown in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
# Trades

$ Trades

Excess
Return

Market-Adjusted
Return

Excess
Return

Market-Adjusted
Return

（1）

（2）

（3）

（4）

̂

i,t

0.579***
(0.070)

0.582***
(0.073)

0.558***
(0.077)

0.560***
(0.063)

̂

j,t

0.289***
(0.074)

0.282***
(0.070)

0.306***
(0.085)

0.299***
(0.064)

̂

j,t

× IHH

0.150***
(0.028)

0.162***
(0.030)

0.152***
(0.028)

0.162***
(0.030)

̂

j,t

× ILH

0.082**
(0.035)

0.096**
(0.042)

0.086**
(0.035)

0.098***
(0.034)

̂

j,t

× IHL

0.035
(0.027)

0.035
(0.034)

0.040
(0.027)

0.042
(0.027)

2,019,064

2,019,064

2,019,064

2,019,064

# Obs.

39

Table 7
Does word-of-mouth help investors make better investment decisions?
This table reports monthly returns of hedge portfolios that (1) go long acquirer-industry stocks bought by target
investors and their neighbors (―long leg‖) and (2) go short acquirer-industry stocks sold by target investors and their
neighbors (―short leg‖). We experiment with three portfolio construction schemes: For each stock in the acquirer
industry traded by target investors and their neighbors from months 7 through 18 after the M&A is announced, we
compute the total number of shares bought by target investors and their neighbors minus the total number of shares
sold. The long leg contains stocks of which target investors and their neighbors are net buyers; the short leg contains
stocks of which they are net sellers. The long and short legs are weighted by the net total number of shares bought
(sold) across target investors and their neighbors, and they are held for one month. We report these results in Panel
A. We then repeat the above but we now consider the dollar value of shares as opposed to the number of shares. We
report these results in Panel B. Next, for each stock in the acquirer industry traded by target investors and their
neighbors from months 7 through 18 after the M&A is announced, we compute the equal-weighted average change
in a stock’s weight in target investors’ and target neighbors’ portfolios. The long leg contains stocks that experience
an increase; the short leg contains stocks that experience a decrease. The long and short legs are weighted by the
relevant stock’s portfolio weight change, and they are held again for one month. We report these results in Panel C.
T-statistics, shown in parentheses, are computed based on standard errors with Newey-West corrections of twelve
lags. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Excess Return
(1)

CAPM Alpha
(2)

Three-Factor Alpha
(3)

Four-Factor Alpha
(4)

-0.15%
(-0.42)

-0.13%
(-0.29)

-0.16%
(-0.28)

-0.02%
(-0.04)

-0.69%
(-0.69)

-0.33%
(-0.29)

Panel A: Returns to portfolios weighted by number of shares traded
Buy-Sell

-0.35%
(-1.01)

-0.24%
(-0.53)

Panel B: Returns to portfolios weighted by trading value
Buy-Sell

-0.36%
(-0.73)

-0.13%
(-0.23)

Panel C: Returns to portfolios weighted by portfolio weight changes
Buy-Sell

-1.14%
(-0.90)

-1.29%
(-1.01)

40

Fig. 1. Number of investors in each state.
This figure shows the number of investors in each state in our sample. The darker the color of the block, the larger
the number of investors in the state.

41

A. “Simple” difference-in-differences analysis

B. “Dynamic” estimation procedure

1

t=0

1
5

2

5

2

4

4

3

3

1

t=1

5

2
4
3

1

t=2

1
5

2

5

2

4

4

3

3

Fig. 2. ―Simple‖ difference-in-differences analysis versus ―dynamic‖ estimation procedure
This figure illustrates the difference between our ―simple‖ difference-in-differences analysis in Section 4 and our
―dynamic‖ estimation procedure in Section 5. Dark dots represent investors with abnormal trading in the acquirer
industry; gray dots represent investors with no such abnormal trading activity.

42

Fig. 3. Communication rate in each state (# trades).
This figure shows the variation of communication rates across states. The darker the color of the block, the higher
the average communication rate in the state. Trading is defined based on the number of trades.

43

Fig. 4. Communication rate in each state ($ trades)
This figure shows the variation of communication rates across states. The darker the color of the block, the higher
the average communication rate in the state. Trading is defined based on the dollar value of trades.

44

