Epidemiological Modeling of News and Rumors on Twitter
Fang Jin∗, Edward Dougherty †, Parang Saraf∗, Yang Cao∗†, Naren Ramakrishnan∗
∗

Department of Computer Science
Genetics, Bioinformatics, and Computational Biology Department
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061

†

{jfang8, parang, ycao, naren}@cs.vt.edu, †edougherty@vt.edu

∗

ABSTRACT
Characterizing information diffusion on social platforms like
Twitter enables us to understand the properties of underlying media and model communication patterns. As Twitter
gains in popularity, it has also become a venue to broadcast
rumors and misinformation. We use epidemiological models to characterize information cascades in twitter resulting
from both news and rumors. Specifically, we use the SEIZ
enhanced epidemic model that explicitly recognizes skeptics
to characterize eight events across the world and spanning
a range of event types. We demonstrate that our approach
is accurate at capturing diffusion in these events. Our approach can be fruitfully combined with other strategies that
use content modeling and graph theoretic features to detect
(and possibly disrupt) rumors.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications—
Data Mining; I.2.6 [Artificial Intelligence]: Learning—
Knowledge acquisition; Parameter learning

General Terms
Experimentation, Performance

Keywords
SIS, SEIZ, Epidemiological modeling, Rumor detection.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Online social networks have become a staging ground for
modern movements, with the Arab Spring being the most
prominent example. Nine out of ten Egyptians and Tunisians
responded to a poll indicating that they used Facebook to
organize protests and spread awareness. As a precautionary measure, governments have taken to blocking social networking websites, showcasing the importance of understanding this phenomenon.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
The 7th SNA-KDD Workshop ’13 (SNA-KDD’13), August 11, 2013,
Chicago, United States.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2330-7 ...$5.00.

Interestingly, the role of social networks is not limited to
helping organize the activities of disruptive elements. Many
key government and news agencies have also begun to embrace Twitter and other social platforms to disseminate information. After the tragic 2013 explosions at the Boston
Marathon, the FBI resorted to online social networks to
broadcast crucial information about the suspects. The viral
diffusion of information provided them with vital information about the suspects. At the same time it is well known
that online activity on sites such as Reddit led to mistaken
identification of some individuals and the spread of several
rumors.
We were motivated to apply the latest in epidemiological
modeling to understand information diffusion on Twitter, in
relation to the spread of both news and rumors. Epidemiological models provide a classical approach to study how
information diffuses. These models typically divide the total population into several compartments which reflect the
status of an individual. For instance, common compartments denote susceptible (S), exposed (E), infected (I), and
recovered (R) individuals. Individuals transit from one compartment to another, with certain probabilities that have to
be estimated from data. The simplest model, SI, has two
states; susceptible (S) individuals get infected (I) by one of
their neighbors and stay infected thereinafter. While conceptually easy to understand, it is also unrealistic for practical situations. The SIS model is popular in infectious disease
modeling wherein individuals can transition back and forth
between susceptible (S) and infected (I) states (e.g., think
of allergies and the common cold); this model is often used
as the baseline model for more sophisticated approaches.
The SIR model enables individuals to recover (R) but is not
suited for modeling news cascades on Twitter since there is
no intuitive mapping to what ‘recovering’ means. The SEIZ
model (susceptible, exposed, infected, skeptic) proposed by
Bettencourt et al. [1] takes the interesting approach of introducing an exposed state (E). Individuals in such a state take
some time before they begin to believe (I) in a story (i.e.,
get infected). While the authors of [1] used this approach to
model the adoption of Feynman diagrams by communities
of physicists, our work explores their use in modeling news
and rumors on Twitter.
The key contributions of this paper are:
• Our work is the first to employ the SEIZ model to
model real Twitter datasets. We employ non-linear
least squares optimization of the underlying systems
of ODEs over tweet data, and demonstrate how this

model is better at modeling rumor and news diffusion
than the traditional SIS model.
• We analyze eight representative stories (four true events
and four rumors) across a range of topics (politics, terrorism, entertainment, and crime) and over several geographic regions (USA, Mexico, Venezuela, Cuba, Vatican). While not an exhaustive list, this demonstrates
the wide applicability of the proposed model.
• We demonstrate the capability of the SEIZ model to
quantify compartment transition dynamics. We showcase how such information could facilitate the development of screening criteria for distinguishing rumors
from real news happenings on Twitter.

2.

RELATED WORK

Rumor modeling.
As far as we know, Daley [5] first proposed the similarity
between epidemics and rumors using mathematical analysis.
Some researchers have studied rumor propagation modeling
in different network topologies [13, 22]; however, they do not
provide any discussion of propagation differences between
news and rumors. Shah et al. [17] detect rumor sources in
network using maximum likelihood modeling. In [2], Budak
et al. prove that minimizing the spread of the misinformation (i.e., rumors) in social networks is an NP-hard problem
and also provide a greedy approximate solution. Castillo et
al. [3] delve into twitter content modeling, such as sentiment
analysis and hashtags to identify rumors, while Qazvinian
et al. [15] try to address this issue using broader linguistic
methods, to learn possible features of rumor and determine
whether a twitter user believes a rumor or not. More related work appears in [7, 19]. Our goal is to develop an
understanding of these processes using diffusion models.

Information Diffusion.
Significant work has gone into research on information
diffusion on social media, e.g., see [4, 9, 16, 21]. Recently,
Matsubara etc. [10] conducted research on the rise and fall
patterns of information diffusion, and managed to capture
the power-law fall pattern and periodicities inherent in such
data. Gomez-Rodriguez et al. [6] built a cascade transmission model to track cascading process taking place over a
network; they traced overall blogs and news for a one-year
period and found that the top 1000 media sites and blogs
tend to have a core-periphery structure.

Epidemiological models.
Mathematical modeling of disease spread not only provides vital information about the propagation of the disease in a human network, but also offers insight into the
strategies that can be used to control them. The classification of the human population into different groups forms
the basic premise of using epidemiological models for modeling information diffusion. The two widely used such models
are SIR (Susceptible, Infected, Recovered) and SIS (Susceptible, Infected, Susceptible) models. Newman et al. [14]
showed that a large class of standard epidemiological models, viz. the SIR models, can be solved exactly on a wide
variety of networks, and confirmed the correctness of solutions with numerical simulations of SIR epidemics on networks. Kimura et al. [8] proposed the application of the SIS
model to study information diffusion where the nodes can
be activated multiple times. Zhao et al. [23] proposed an
SIHR (Spreaders, Ignorants, Hibernators, Removed) rumor
spreading model, with forgetting and remembering mechanisms to simulate rumor spreading in inhomogeneous networks. Xiong et al. [20] proposed a diffusion model with four
different states: susceptible, contacted, infected, and refractory (SCIR) to identify the threshold value of the spreading
rate approaches almost zero. Bettencourt et al. [1] proposed
the SEIZ (susceptible, exposed, infected, skeptic) model to
capture the adoption of Feynman diagrams by using the publication counts after World War II. They extract the general
features for idea spreading and estimate the idea adoption
process. Their result showed that the SEIZ model can fit the
long term idea adoption process with reasonable error, but
does not demonstrate whether this model can be applied on
large scale datasets, or whether can be applied on Twitter,
where the story unfolds in real-time.

3.

DATASETS

We focus on twitter datasets that have reliable coverage of
the events being studied; the volume of tweets ranges from
as low as 791 to nearly three orders of magnitude greater.
As described in Table 1, the news and rumors studied were
drawn from a variety of regions and across a diversity of
topics. Data collection was aimed at gathering tweets highly
related to the events under study. We employed customized
sets of keywords and hashtags pertaining to each incident.
Finally, date range restrictions were used to define relevant
tweets for each event. It is also pertinent to note that the
tweets analyzed spanned a variety of languages: English,
Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese.

3.1

News topics

Boston Marathon Bombings. Two pressure cooker bombs
exploded near the finish line of 2013 Boston Marathon on
April 15, 14:49:12 local time, killing three people and injuring more than 264 others. The FBI released photographs
and surveillance videos on online social networks which spread
like wildfire and provided crucial leads for identifying the
suspects1 .
Pope Resignation. Pope Benedict XVI announced his resignation on the morning of February 11, 2013. In nearly 6
centuries, this was the first time a pope has stepped down
from his office. This news received reactions from all across
the world2 .
Amuay Refinery Explosion. Propane and butane gas
leakage caused an explosion at the Amuay refinery in Venezuela
on August 25, 2012 1:11 am local time. The blast killed 48
people, injured 151 others and damaged 1600 homes3 .
Michelle Obama at the 2013 Oscars. In the 2013 Oscar
awards ceremony, a big surprise was the appearance of US
first lady Michelle Obama for presenting the ‘Best Picture’
award4 .
1
http://www.cnn.com/2013/04/15/us/boston-marathonexplosions
2
http://www.cnn.com/2013/02/11/world/europe/poperesignation-q-and-a
3
http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/25/world/americas/venezuelarefinery-blast
4
http://www.mediaite.com/tv/michelle-obama-makescameo-at-the-oscars-announces-be st-picture-winner/

Table 1: Twitter datasets studied in this paper.
Keywords & Hashtag

USA

#Tweets Response
ratio
501259
68.3%

Vatican

31365

56.75%

Pope, (#)Benedict

Venezuela

49015

62.89%

Amuay, refinery, explosion

entertainmentnews

USA

3762

54.45%

Michelle Obama, Oscars

politics

rumor

USA

791

46.14%

White House, explosions

12-21-2012

mythology

rumor

Global

11833

52.19%

Doomsday, Mayan, doom

Castro

10-16-2012

politics

rumor

Cuba

3862

54.45%

Fidel Castro, Dr. Marquina

Riot

09-05-2012

crime

rumor

Mexico

4838

47.17%

Antorcha Campesina, Nezahualcoyotl

No.

Dataset

Date

Area

Type

Country

1

Boston

04-15-2013

terrorism

news

2

Pope

02-11-2013

religion

news

3

Amuay

08-25-2012

accident

news

4

Michelle

02-24-2013

5

Obama

04-23-2013

6

Doomsday

7
8

(a) Amuay explosion

(b) Castro rumor

Figure 1: Tweet volume.

3.2

Rumors

Obama injured. A fake associated press (AP) tweet originated on April 23, 2013 that President Obama was hurt
in White House explosions which caused a brief period of
instability in financial markets. The information was false
and it was determined that the Twitter account was hacked.
Doomsday. December 21, 2012 was rumored to be the
Doomsday as it marked the end date of a 5126 year long
cycle in the Mesoamerican long count calendar. This rumor
spread like wildfire and social networks were flooded with
panic and anxiety posts. Considering that we are still alive,
Doomsday turned out to be nothing more than a rumor on
a massive scale5 .
Fidel Castro’s death. On October 16, 2012 a Naples doctor claimed that former Cuban leader, Fidel Castro suffered
a cerebral hemorrhage and is near a neurovegetative state.
However, on October 21, 2012, these rumors were denied by
Elias Jauva, former Venezuelan vice president, who released
pictures of him meeting Castro a few days back6 .
Riots and shooting in Mexico. A very interesting example that highlights the perils of rumor spreading on social
networks pertains to the false reports of violence and impending attack in Nezahualcoyotl, Mexico. (False) rumors
spreading on Twitter and Facebook about shootouts caused
(real) panic and chaos in Mexico City on September 5, 2012.
Interestingly, authorities themselves turned to Twitter to
deny these rumors7 .

3.3
5

Preliminary Analysis

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doomsday
http://www.inquisitr.com/371007/fidel-castro-allegedlyappears-in-public-after-stroke-rumors/
7
http://www.foxnews.com/world/2012/09/08/tweets-falseshootouts-cause-panic-in-mexico-city/
6

(a) Amuay explosion

Marathon, (#)bostonmarathon

(b) Castro rumor

Figure 2: Followers/followees distributions. Followers: people who follow the person; Followees: people
who are followed by the person.

We compare the basic properties of news and rumor propagation, by characterizing tweet volume over time, follower/followee
distributions, the ‘response ratio’ of a story, and the retweet
cascades. In order to maintain brevity, we show results from
only two stories in this section: one from our news collection
(the Amuay explosion) and one from our rumor collection
(Fidel Castro’s purported death).
Tweet Volume. For both examples, we plot the tweet
volume over time from the beginning of the story. Figure 1(a) shows the activity for the 2012 Amuay refinery
explosion example. An activity burst was formed immediately after the news was made public. The number of tweets
dropped progressively as the days went by. This activity
trend displays attributes similar to breaking news propagation as described by Mendoza et al. [11]. In contrast, Figure 1(b) depicts the volume of tweets about a rumor regarding the health of the former Cuban leader Fidel Castro. Here
we see occasional spikes of tweet volume; note the increase
in tweet volume around October 21st, when the rumors were
officially denied.
Followers and Followees Distributions. Figure 2(a)
is a log-log scatter plot of the followers/followees distribution about the Amuay explosion news, and Figure 2(b) is
the corresponding plot about Fidel Castro’s death rumor.
There is no significant qualitative or quantitative difference
in this case; in particular both plots show that the number
of followees is less than the number of followers.
Response Ratio. A tweet can either be a post made
by the user’s initiative, or a responsive post to some other
user’s post (e.g., retweets and replies). As Starbird et al. [18]
discuss, retweets reveal how information propagates through
a social network: the ‘deeper’ a retweet, the more relevant

(a) Amuay Cascade

(b) Castro Cascade

Figure 3: Retweet cascade for the Amuay Explosion news and Castro rumor. Each node is a user id, and
each edge connects the retweet user to the original user.
the tweet is for the community. Based on this idea, we define
the response ratio of a story as the fraction of responsive
tweets to the total number of tweets in the story. Table 1
lists the response ratio for all the 8 stories. As we can see,
response ratios for news are higher than that for the rumors.
Retweet Cascades. A retweet cascade reflects how the
social media network propagates information. Figure 3 depicts the evolution of the retweet graphs for the Amuay news
and Castro rumor dataset. For Amuay news, we plot four
graphs with intervals of 6 hours, depicting that a burst has
been formed during 6am-12am, only 5 hours after the accident. Fig. 3(b) shows the retweet graphs of the rumor for
several days. We can see even after one day, there is no burst
of tweets related to this rumor. Compared with the network between the news and rumors, we find several features
about the rumor. 1) The network for the news instance is
more complex and users can obtain news from many sources,
while users obtain the rumor information only from limited
information centers. 2) There is an immediate burst after a
news is made public while there is no obvious burst for the
rumors.

use N (t) to denote the total population size, S(t) the susceptible population size, and I(t) the infected population size,
such that N (t) = I(t) + S(t). As shown in Figure 4, the SIS
spreading rule can be summarized as follows:

Figure 4: SIS model framework

Figure 5: SEIZ model framework

4.

OUR APPROACH

As stated earlier, we used compartmental population models to quantify the propagation of news and rumors on Twitter, focusing primarily on the SIS and SEIZ models.

4.1

SIS

As described earlier, this model divides the population
into two compartments, or classes: susceptible and infected.
Note that in this model, infected individuals return to the
susceptible class on recovery because the disease confers no
immunity against reinfection.
In order to adapt this model for Twitter, we have given
new meaning to these terms. An individual is identified as
infected (I) if he posts a tweet about the topic of interest,
and susceptible (S) if he has not. A consequence of this interpretation is that an individual posting a tweet is retained
to the infected compartment indefinitely; hence, he can not
propagate back to the susceptible class as is possible in an
epidemiological application. At any given time period t, we

• An individual that tweets about a topic is regarded as
infected.
• A susceptible person has not tweeted about the topic.
• A susceptible person coming into contact with an infected individual (via a tweet) becomes infected himself, thus immediately posting a tweet.
• Susceptible individuals remain so until coming into
contact with an infected person.
The SIS model is mathematically represented by the following system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [12]:
d[S]
= −βSI + αI
dt
d[I]
= βSI − αI
dt

(1a)
(1b)

Table 2: Parameter definitions in SEIZ model[1]
Parameter Definition
β

Figure 6: Numerical implementation work-flow.

4.2

SEIZ

One drawback of the SIS model is that once a susceptible individual gets exposed to disease, he can only directly
transition to infected status. In fact, especially on Twitter, this assumption does not work well; people’s ideologies
are complex and when they are exposed to news or rumors,
they may hold different views, take time to adopt an idea, or
even be skeptical to some facts. In this situation, they might
be persuaded to propagate a story, or commence only after
careful consideration themselves. Additionally, it is quite
conceivable that an individual can be exposed to a story
(i.e. received a tweet), yet never post a tweet themselves.
Based on this reasoning, we considered a more applicable,
robust model, the SEIZ model which was first used to study
the adoption of Feynman diagrams [1]. In the context of
Twitter, the different compartments of the SEIZ model can
be viewed as follows: Susceptible (S) represents a user who
has not heard about the news yet; infected (I) denotes a user
who has tweeted about the news; skeptic (Z) is a user who
has heard about the news but chooses not to tweet about it;
and exposed (E) represents a user who has received the news
via a tweet but has taken some time, an exposure delay, prior
to posting. We note that referring to the Z compartment as
skeptics is in no way an implication of belief or skepticism
of a news story or rumor. We adopt this terminology as this
was the nomenclature used by the original authors of the
SEIZ model [1].
A major improvement of the SEIZ model over the SIS
model is the incorporation of exposure delay. That is, an individual may be exposed to a story, but not instantaneously
tweet about it. After a period of time, he may believe it and
then be promoted to the infected compartment. Further,
it is now possible for an individual in this model to receive
a tweet, and not tweet about it themselves. As shown in
Figure 5, SEIZ rules can be summarized as follows:
• Skeptics recruit from the susceptible compartment with
rate b, but these actions may result either in turning
the individual into another skeptic (with probability l),
or it may have the unintended consequence of sending
that person into the exposed (E) compartment with
probability (1 − l).
• A susceptible individual will immediately believe a news
story or rumor with probability p, or that person will
move to the exposed (E) compartment with probability (1 − p).
• Transitioning of individuals from the exposed compartment to the infected class can be caused by one of
two separate mechanisms: (i) an individual in the exposed class has further contact with an infected individual (with contact rate ρ), and this additional con-

S-I contact rate

b

S-Z contact rate

ρ

E-I contact rate



Incubation rate

1/

Average Incubation Time

bl

Effective rate of S -> Z

βρ

Effective rate of S -> I

b(1-l)

Effective rate of S -> E via contact with Z

β(1 − p)

Effective rate of S -> E via contact with I

l

S->Z Probability given contact with skeptics

1-l

S->E Probability given contact with skeptics

p

S->I Probability given contact with adopters

1-p

S->E Probability given contact with adopters

tact promotes him to infected; (ii) an individual in
the exposed class may become infected purely by selfadoption (with rate ), and not from additional contact
with those already infected.
The SEIZ model is mathematically represented by the following system of ODEs. A slight difference of our implementation of this model is that we do not incorporate vital
dynamics, which includes the rate at which individuals enter and leave the population N (represented by µ [1]). In
epidemiological disease applications, this encompasses the
rate at which people become susceptible (e.g. born) and
deceased. In our application, a Twitter topic has a net duration not exceeding several days. Thus, the net entrance
and exodus of Twitter users over these relatively short time
periods is not expected to noticeably impact compartment
sizes and our ultimate findings8 .
d[S]
dt
d[E]
dt
d[I]
dt
d[Z]
dt

4.3

I
Z
− bS
N
N
I
Z
I
= (1 − p)βS + (1 − l)bS − ρE − E
N
N
N
I
I
= pβS + ρE + E
N
N
Z
= lbS
N
= −βS

(2a)
(2b)
(2c)
(2d)

Practical Issues

During our adoption of the SIS and SEIZ models to understand Twitter datasets, we were constrained by several factors. The first constraint was the unknowns in the models.
For example, we do not know the transition rates between
the compartments nor the initial sizes of the compartments.
Another constraint is the inability to quantify the total
population size. This value appears to simply be the total
number of Twitter accounts; however the value that we truly
want is the number of individuals who could be exposed
to the news or rumor topic. This value shows to be very
different from the total number of Twitter accounts. Consider the ∼175 million (M) registered Twitter accounts. Of
8

http://www.statisticbrain.com/twitter-statistics/

Table 3: Fitting error of SIS and SEIZ models
Boston

Pope

Amuay

Michelle

Obama

Doomsday

Castro

Riot

Average

SIS

0.058

0.041

0.058

0.088

0.102

0.028

0.082

0.096

0.069

SEIZ

0.010

0.004

0.027

0.061

0.101

0.029

0.073

0.053

0.045

(a) SIS

(b) SEIZ

(a) SIS

Figure 7: Best fit modeling for Boston news.

(a) SIS

Figure 9: Best fit modeling for Amuay news.

(b) SEIZ

(a) SIS

Figure 8: Best fit modeling for Pope news.
these, (i) ∼90 million have no followers, and (ii) ∼56 million follow no one9 . To further complicate the matter, there
exists an abundance of “fake” Twitter accounts, which are
never used by any real person. They are simply sold to users
wishing to enhance their perceived popularity. Coupling
these facts with sporadic Twitter usage due to night-time
inactivity and user “unplugging”, it is clear that establishing a reliable estimate of users who could receive a tweet is
quite difficult.
Synthesizing all of these factors, we assume the following
in our SEIZ model implementation:
1. We do not have reliable population specifics.
(a) We do not know N , total population size.
(b) We do not know S(t0 ), E(t0 ), I(t0 ), or Z(t0 ), the
initial values of each population compartment.
2. Infected individuals (I) submit a tweet.
3. Skeptics (Z) have been exposed to story, but do not
tweet.
4. Vital dynamics do not contribute to the overall population size. Thus, N is a constant.
The implication of these assumptions is that total population size N and initial population sizes for each compartment
S(t0 ), E(t0 ), I(t0 ), and Z(t0 ) are viewed as unknowns. They
are therefore treated as parameters in the parameter fit routine, and fit along with the other model parameters [1].
9
http://www.businessinsider.com/chart-of-the-day-howmany-users-does-twitter-really-have-2011-3

(b) SEIZ

(b) SEIZ

Figure 10: Best fit modeling for Michelle news.

4.4

Parameter Identification

For each of the population models (SIS and SEIZ), represented by equation sets 1 and 2, we performed a nonlinear
least squares fit of the model to Twitter data. As shown in
Figure 6, each step of this fitting process involved selecting
a set of parameter values (rate constants and probabilities
in equations 1 and 2, and initial compartment sizes), and
numerically solving the system of ODEs with these parameter values. The set of parameter values that minimized
|I(t) − tweets(t)| was identified as the optimal parameter
set.
The experimental implementation was done in Matlab.
The lsqnonlin function performed the least squares fit. The
ODE systems were solved with a forward Euler function that
we developed. This algorithm was selected due to its computational efficiency, and used a time-step of no more than
0.05. This threshold demonstrated to be numerically stable;
in several instances we compared the forward Euler solution
to those generated by Matlab’s ode45 (5th -order Explicit
Runge-Kutta with embedded 4th -order error control), and
observed nearly identical solutions.

5.
5.1

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Fitting Results

For each of the Twitter datasets, we were interested in
quantifying the transitions of users through the different
compartments of the SIS and SEIZ models. Figures 7 - 14
display the results for the best fit of SIS and SEIZ models (Equations 1 and 2) to the eight Twitter stories. Also

(a) SIS

(b) SEIZ

Figure 11: Best fit modeling for Obama news.

(a) SIS

(b) SEIZ

Figure 12: Best fit modeling for Doomsday rumor.

(a) SIS

(b) SEIZ

Figure 13: Best fit modeling for Castro rumor.

(a) SIS

(b) SEIZ

Figure 14: Best fit modeling for Riot news.

displayed for each figure are the relative error in 2-norm
||I(t) − tweets(t)||2
||tweets(t)||2
and the mean error deviation
Pn
i=1 |I(ti ) − tweets(ti )|
,
n
where n is the number of data points.
The error metrics for these eight stories clearly indicate
that the SEIZ model fits the Twitter data much more accurately than the SIS model. Furthermore, the low relative error of the SEIZ model fit suggests that this model accurately
represents the Twitter data for each of the eight stories; see
Table 3. A common observation about all the eight stories
is that the SEIZ model is far more accurate in modelling the
initial spread of the news on Twitter as compared with the
SIS model. This behaviour can be explained by the delay
caused by individuals in the “Exposed” category taking some
time before posting a story themselves [1].
Given that the SEIZ model is superior to the SIS model in
this application, and that the SEIZ model demonstrates an
accurate representation of information diffusion on Twitter,
a natural question arises “How can this model help us?” The
answer is really simple. Since we have a mathematical model
for the Twitter data, we can study solutions to some of the
constraints as mentioned in the “Practical Issues” section. A
well fitted SEIZ model provides values for all contact rates
and transition probabilities as defined by Equation 2. These
parameters empower us to investigate the dynamics of news
and rumor spread on Twitter in a fashion that is not possible
without a mathematical model. Table 2 specifies the SEIZ
model parameters that we can now examine to assess news
and rumor propagation on Twitter.

5.2

Boston Marathon Bombing Analysis

To demonstrate a line of analysis that is now possible with
the SEIZ mathematical model, we use quantities from the

SEIZ model fit of the Boston Marathon bombing Twitter
data (Table 2). Results are summarized in Table 4.
Here we discuss the dynamics of all 4 compartments, so we
specially show all 4 compartments in the SEIZ time-course
plot only for Boston Marathon bombing (Figure 15(a)). These
results suggest that the effective rate of susceptible individuals becoming skeptics is much greater than those that
becoming infected. The decrease in S(t) occurs directly
with an increase in Z(t), and S(t) becomes stable at the
same time that Z(t). I(t) does increase as S(t) decreases,
but its rate of change is much slower, and the majority of
I(t) increase occurs after S(t) has stabilized to a minimal
value, demonstrating that the continued change in the infected compartment has no further influence on the change
in the susceptible compartment.
Table 4 also demonstrates that the skeptics compartment
is more influential on transitioning susceptible users to the
exposed class than does infected users. Figure 15(a) shows
this as the increase in E(t) is strongly correlated with the
increase in Z(t). E(t) also peaks as Z(t) peaks, and E(t) begins to decrease at a rate negative to that of the I(t) increase.
In fact, the increase in I(t) directly coincides with a comparable decrease in E(t). These data suggest that the increase
in infected users is not due in large part by recruitment of
susceptible users, but rather from the natural transition to
the infected compartment by exposed individuals.
Putting this all together, we can deduce that virtually
all individuals are initially in the susceptible compartment.
Most susceptible users become skeptics from interaction with
skeptics, and those susceptible users that do transition to the
exposed class do so by their interaction with skeptics. The
infected compartment increases predominately from the exposed class, and not from direct recruitment of susceptible
individuals. Thus, these findings suggest that it was in-fact
non-Twitter mediums that most greatly aided in the generation of Twitter propagation! Further, the ρ ratio indicates
that the exposed users became infected more so due to infor-

(a) Boston

(b) Pope

(c) Amuay

(d) Michelle

(e) Obama

(f) Doomsday

(g) Castro

(h) Riot

Figure 15: SEIZ compartment time-course results.

Table 4: Ratios of SEIZ model for Boston dataset.
bl
βp

3.1E5

b(1 − l)
β(1 − p)

1.0E4


ρ

7.8

Figure 16: RSI values for eight Twitter datasets.
mation incubation and self-adoption, and not so much from
direct contact with infected users.
The remaining instances of SEIZ time-course plots are
shown in Figure 15, we can see how S, E, and I dynamic
change over time. These analyses exemplify the types of
analyses that can be used to study Twitter dynamics via
the SEIZ population model.

5.3

Rumor Detection

We next examined if our implementation of the SEIZ
model, applied to our Twitter examples, could be utilized to
facilitate the discrimination of true news from rumors. We
began by assembling an equation to relate the key parameters of the SEIZ model. In our first attempt at performing
this, we restricted our attention to the exposed compartment; this class has direct or indirect interconnections between the other three compartments, and is a key path to
the infected compartment. To exemplify this, consider the
extreme case where susceptible individuals are attempted
to be recruited by skeptics, and ultimately end up in the
infected compartment (Figure 5). This can only be accomplished by passing through the exposed compartment.
We quantify a ratio through E as the ratio of the sum
of the effective transition rates entering this compartment
(from S) to the sum of the transition rates exiting this compartment (to I). We define this ratio as RSI , using the
subscripts to denote the contributions from the susceptible
and infected compartments in this quantity:

RSI =

(1 − p)β + (1 − l)b
ρ+

(3)

RSI possesses all rate constants and probability values
of the SEIZ model and relates them to the exposed compartment with a kind of flux ratio, viz. the ratio of effects
entering E to those leaving E. A RSI value greater than
1 implies that the influx into the exposed compartment is
greater than the efflux. Similarly, a value less than 1 indicates that members are added to the exposed group more
slowly than they are removed. We hypothesized that this
measure could potentially aid in the distinction of rumor
topics from news topics; all parameters of the SEIZ fit are
utilized in this measure, and they are related via the RSI
value to a key compartment of this model. If a distinction
between rumors and true news stories is to be seen with the
SEIZ model, we identify the RSI measure to be a probable
candidate in aiding this process.
We then computed RSI using the specific parameter values attained from our model fits of the eight cases (Figure 16). Here we can see that the true news about the
Boston Marathon bombing, Pope resignation, and Amuay
refinery explosion do in fact have much higher RSI values
than the rumor topics: Doomsday, Fidel Castro death, Mexico City riots, and Barrack Obama injury which each have
much lower RSI values. However, the Michelle presence at

the Oscars, which is classified as true news, has a very low
RSI value. This particular case is interesting since Michelle
did not really show up to the 2013 Oscar Awards Ceremony.
She simply participated remotely via video telecast. It is
thus arguable that this topic could have been discussed in
the media in terms similar to rumors.
These findings suggest, for these specific topics, that the
parameters in the SEIZ model can potentially aid in the
challenge of distinguishing rumor versus true news. We are
not claiming that the RSI value is the unique measure to
accomplish this, nor are we claiming that the SEIZ model
itself is the sole tool to do this. As is suggested by our findings, we postulate that a fit of a compartmental model, in
the spirit of the SEIZ model, to Twitter data provides valuable propagation information that can be coupled with other
data analysis strategies (e.g., content modeling) to augment
the accuracy and reliability of true news story and rumor
topic discrimination.

6.

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have demonstrated how true news and
rumor stories being propagated over Twitter can be modelled by epidemiologically-based population models. We have
shown that the SEIZ model, in particular, is accurate in capturing the information spread of a variety of news and rumor
topics, thereby generating a wealth of valuable parameters
to facilitate the analysis of these events. We then demonstrated how these parameters can also be incorporated into
a strategy for supporting the identification of Twitter topics
as rumor or news. As of now, we are modeling propagation
over static data. In future, we plan to adapt this model for
capturing news and rumors in real-time.

Acknowledgments
Supported by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects
Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior National Business Center (DoI/NBC) contract number D12PC000337, the
US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official
policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of
IARPA, DoI/NBC, or the US Government.

7.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Bettencourt, A. Cintrón-Arias, D. I. Kaiser, and
C. Castillo-Chávez. The power of a good idea:
Quantitative modeling of the spread of ideas from
epidemiological models. PHYSICA A, 364:513–536,
2006.
[2] C. Budak, D. Agrawal, and A. El Abbadi. Limiting
the spread of misinformation in social networks. In
Proc. WWW’11, pages 665–674. ACM, 2011.
[3] C. Castillo, M. Mendoza, and B. Poblete. Information
credibility on twitter. In Proc. WWW’11, pages
675–684. ACM, 2011.
[4] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. P.
Gummadi. Measuring user influence in twitter: The
million follower fallacy. In ICWSM’10, volume 14,
page 8, 2010.

[5] D. J. Daley and D. G. Kendall. Epidemics and
rumours. Nature, 204(4963):1118–1118, 1964.
[6] M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. Leskovec, and A. Krause.
Inferring networks of diffusion and influence. In Proc.
SIGKDD’10, pages 1019–1028. ACM, 2010.
[7] V. Isham, S. Harden, and M. Nekovee. Stochastic
epidemics and rumours on finite random networks.
PHYSICA A, 389(3):561–576, 2010.
[8] M. Kimura, K. Saito, and H. Motoda. Efficient
estimation of influence functions for sis model on
social networks. In Proc. IJCAI’09, pages 2046–2051.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2009.
[9] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon. What is
twitter, a social network or a news media? In Proc.
WWW’10, pages 591–600. ACM, 2010.
[10] Y. Matsubara, Y. Sakurai, B. A. Prakash, L. Li, and
C. Faloutsos. Rise and fall patterns of information
diffusion: model and implications. In Proc.
SIGKDD’12, pages 6–14. ACM, 2012.
[11] M. Mendoza, B. Poblete, and C. Castillo. Twitter
under crisis: Can we trust what we rt? In Proc.
SOMA ’10, pages 71–79. ACM, 2010.
[12] J. D. Murray. Mathematical biology, volume 2.
springer, 2002.
[13] M. Nekovee, Y. Moreno, G. Bianconi, and M. Marsili.
Theory of rumour spreading in complex social
networks. PHYSICA A, 374(1):457–470, 2007.
[14] M. E. Newman. Spread of epidemic disease on
networks. Physical review E, 66(1):016128, 2002.
[15] V. Qazvinian, E. Rosengren, D. R. Radev, and
Q. Mei. Rumor has it: Identifying misinformation in
microblogs. In Proc. EMNLP’11, pages 1589–1599.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2011.
[16] D. M. Romero, B. Meeder, and J. Kleinberg.
Differences in the mechanics of information diffusion
across topics: idioms, political hashtags, and complex
contagion on twitter. In Proc. WWW’11, pages
695–704. ACM, 2011.
[17] D. Shah and T. Zaman. Rumors in a network: Who’s
the culprit? Information Theory, IEEE Transactions
on, 57(8):5163–5181, 2011.
[18] K. Starbird and L. Palen. (how) will the revolution be
retweeted?: information diffusion and the 2011
egyptian uprising. In Proc. ACM’12, pages 7–16.
ACM, 2012.
[19] D. Trpevski, W. K. Tang, and L. Kocarev. Model for
rumor spreading over networks. Physical Review E,
81(5):056102, 2010.
[20] F. Xiong, Y. Liu, Z.-j. Zhang, J. Zhu, and Y. Zhang.
An information diffusion model based on retweeting
mechanism for online social media. Physics Letters A,
376(30-31):2103–2108, 2012.
[21] J. Yang and S. Counts. Predicting the speed, scale,
and range of information diffusion in twitter. Proc.
AAAI’10, 2010.
[22] D. H. Zanette. Dynamics of rumor propagation on
small-world networks. Physical Review E,
65(4):041908, 2002.
[23] L. Zhao, H. Cui, X. Qiu, X. Wang, and J. Wang. Sir
rumor spreading model in the new media age.
PHYSICA A, 392(4):995–1003, 2012.

