NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BELIEF DISAGREEMENT AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE
Maarten Meeuwis
Jonathan A. Parker
Antoinette Schoar
Duncan I. Simester
Working Paper 25108
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25108

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2018, Revised June 2021

For helpful comments, we thank Roland Benabou, Ing-Haw Cheng, James Choi, Gregory Huber,
Steve Nicholson, Lubos Pastor, Chester Spatt, Johannes Stroebel, David Thesmar, PaulWillen,
and seminar participants at Boston College, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Goethe
University, Ohio State, MIT, NYU, Northwestern, Penn, Stanford, UCLA, Washington
University in St. Louis, and conference participants at the AEA 2019 Annual Meetings, the
Macro Financial Modeling Winter 2019 Meeting, the SED Day-Ahead Conference 2019, and the
NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing Meeting. We thank our data provider for use and
explanations of their data and Yijun Liu for research assistance. Data were obtained under a nondisclosure agreement with a financial institution. All authors are consultants for the large
financial institution, but only Duncan Simester receives financial compensation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2018 by Maarten Meeuwis, Jonathan A. Parker, Antoinette Schoar, and Duncan I. Simester. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Belief Disagreement and Portfolio Choice
Maarten Meeuwis, Jonathan A. Parker, Antoinette Schoar, and Duncan I. Simester
NBER Working Paper No. 25108
September 2018, Revised June 2021
JEL No. D14,D84,E71,G11,G12,G40
ABSTRACT
Using proprietary portfolio data on millions of households, we show that (likely) Republicans
increase the equity share and market beta of their portfolios following the 2016 presidential
election, while (likely) Democrats rebalance into safe assets. We provide evidence that this
behavior is driven by investors interpreting public information using different models of the
world, by ruling out the main non-belief-based channels (like income hedging needs, preferences,
local economic exposure) using detailed controls for ex ante wealth and investments,
demographics and income, and even county-employer-period fixed effects. These findings are
driven by a small share of investors making big changes in allocation, and are stronger among
investors who are more attentive to their portfolios or who do not delegate their investment
decisions.
Maarten Meeuwis
Washington University in St. Louis
Olin Business School
One Brookings Drive
Campus Box 1133
St. Louis, MO 63130
m.meeuwis@wustl.edu
Jonathan A. Parker
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
JAParker@MIT.edu

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu
Duncan I. Simester
Sloan School of Management
MIT E62-542
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142-0679
simester@mit.edu

A online appendix is available at https://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25108/

The canonical assumption in most economic models is that people have rational expectations
with common priors. However, in both the laboratory and the real world, people tend to report
different probabilities for the same event, and update these reported beliefs differently in response
to common information.1 A leading interpretation of this evidence is that people believe in different models of the world – they hold different possibly dogmatic priors – which leads them to
disagree both about baseline probabilities and about the implications of common information for
future outcomes. However, a major challenge in testing this proposition outside of artificial laboratory environments has been to identify and measure behavioral responses that come from changes
in beliefs separately from behavioral responses that come through other economic channels or are
driven by other dimensions of preferences.2 In this paper, we test this proposition not by inferring
beliefs from reported beliefs or asset prices, but by showing that investors adjust their portfolios
differently in response to the same public event and by ruling out the main non-belief channels
through which the event may have caused this behavior.
Specifically, we posit that a person’s political affiliation measures the model of the world that
they use to interpret the economic impact of political outcomes. We then study portfolio differences by political affiliation (inferred from zip code) using anonymized, proprietary data on millions of Retirement Investors, defined as retail investors with retirement savings accounts in the
middle 80% of the age-adjusted distribution of retirement wealth.3 Consistent with Republicans
(Democrats) reporting to become more optimistic (pessimistic) about future US economic performance following the US national election of 2016, we show that (likely) Republicans rebalance
their portfolios towards equity, while (likely) Democrats rebalance their portfolios towards relatively safe assets after the unexpected outcome of the election, both over a six to nine-month
horizon following the election.
The key challenge for identifying the role of beliefs in this portfolio rebalancing is that, even
if investors held common priors and updated rationally, the real impact of the election could still
differentially change their hedging needs or overall wealth levels. For example, Republican and
Democratic voters tend to work in different industries and live in different parts of the country so
that their future incomes and costs of living might be differentially affected by the election.4 Such
economic differences could generate different behavior not driven by beliefs. Previous research
(discussed subsequently) has documented both differential economic impacts of election outcomes
and a relationship between reported beliefs and behavior. Our key contribution (along with more
1 Brunnermeier

et al. (2021) surveys both the research on, and importance of, non-rational beliefs for asset returns.
follow the Savage, revealed-preference terminology, and use the term preferences to refer to the elements of
investor objective functions that are distinct from the beliefs that represent subjective probabilities about realizations of
states.
3 Retirement investors make up 40% of US households, and hold 47% of total retirement wealth and 41% of all
household investable wealth (see Section III).
4 As in Pastor and Veronesi (forthcoming) and Autor et al. (2020).
2 We

1

accurate measurement) is that we rule out the main channels through which the election may have
differentially impacted individuals’ portfolio behavior other than through beliefs.
Our main finding is that (likely) Republicans increase the equity share and market beta of their
portfolios relative to otherwise similar (likely) Democrats, even conditional on detailed controls both
for ex ante differences in preferences and endowments and for ex post differences in local economic conditions and income hedging needs. That is, differences in portfolio rebalancing between
Republican and Democratic voters following the election are not explained by differences in ex
ante wealth, income, age, or characteristics of portfolios. More importantly, rebalancing is also not
explained by differential exposure to regional or firm-level policies due to the election outcome:
we find different investment behavior comparing investors working at the same employer and
living in the same county (that is, after controlling for county-employer-period). Further, these
changes in portfolio holdings arise from active rebalancing, net of any differences in passive portfolio appreciation. Finally, the outcome of the 2016 election was an unlikely event, the policy
differences between presidential candidates were large, and the portfolio share of equity moves
similarly for Republicans and Democrats in the year prior to the election, all suggesting that the
differential rebalancing is a response to the election rather than other differences correlated with
party affiliation.
Having controlled for the main channels through which rational theories operate, we conclude
that this rebalancing behavior is due to differential updating of beliefs about the expected return
of stock market investments, likely through the performance of the US economy. Consistent with
this interpretation, people affiliated with either party report little change in their views about their
own individual economic situations, but report updating significantly differently by party about
macro-level economic prospects, consistent with Huberman et al. (2018). However, we cannot
reject that arbitrary preference variation by party affiliation drove the differences in both reported
beliefs and investment behavior.5
Quantitatively, the average effect of the election on portfolio allocations grows slowly over
months following the election. Ultimately, the quintile of most Republican zip codes increase the
equity shares of their portfolios by roughly half a percent relative to the quintile of most Democratic zip codes. This relatively small average result masks substantial heterogeneity. Most of
the investors that we observe do not rebalance at all; only a third of investors actively change
their portfolio in any given year and only a tenth of investors change their allocations across asset classes (consistent with the passivity documented in Madrian and Shea (2001) and Choi et al.
5 Revealed preference theory implies that it is impossible to separate arbitrary preferences variation from beliefs. As
an example, our findings could be due to Republicans and Democrats consuming different bundles of goods which have
prices that are differentially exposed to the outcome of the election even after conditioning on observable factors. For
instance (as suggested by a referee), gun control policies could affect the costs of firearms for those who have preference
for owning guns.

2

(2004)). Among the investors who do rebalance, the election had a much larger effect. For those
investors who active reallocated their portfolios during the year before our main sample starts, the
effect of the election on equity share is three times as large. More strikingly, seventy-five percent
of our effect comes from investors who change the equity share of their portfolio by more than
twenty-five percent after the election.
This heterogeneity in responses varies by how actively investors are engaged in their portfolio
choices. Wealthier and older investors, who tend to be generally more attentive to managing their
savings, rebalance more strongly in response to the election. And investors who delegate more –
who have a larger fraction of their wealth invested in automatic investment products such as target
date funds or accounts managed by an advisor – rebalance by less in response to the election. Our
results are in line with the attenuation puzzle – the low correlation between portfolio holdings and
reported beliefs – documented in Ameriks et al. (2020), and the finding that changes in reported
beliefs do not predict the likelihood of trading but do predict the direction of trading conditional
on a trade, documented in Giglio et al. (forthcoming).
As corroborating evidence that differential updating of beliefs drives portfolio behavior, we
follow Curtin (2017) and show that Republicans in University of Michigan Survey of Consumer
Confidence (SCC) report becoming much more optimistic about the future of the US economy
following the 2016 US national election, while Democrats report becoming more pessimistic.6 This
pattern of reported beliefs is consistent with a substantial literature documenting that political
affiliations lead people to report that they interpret public news differently.7
Our results also provide some validation that survey-reported beliefs on the macroeconomy
contain substantial information about true beliefs that are independent of people’s individual
economic situations or preferences. An influential literature (described in Section II) shows that
survey-reported beliefs correlate with financial behaviors. By identifying a specific event that
changes beliefs and controlling for the main alternative channels through which the event could
have changed portfolios other than through beliefs, we confirm that heterogeneous beliefs are a
major factor driving both survey responses and differential portfolio allocations.
Our results support models in which people agree to disagree even in asset markets where
prices convey information. In a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we show that the change in beliefs and behavior induced by the 2016 election has a small quantitative effect on the net demand
for stocks, on the order of a few billion dollars. As noted, the rebalancing we find occurs over
6A

different type of corroborating evidence is provided by research showing that “sentiment” is correlated with
risk-taking (e.g. Edmans et al., 2007; Kamstra et al., 2003; Hirshleifer and Shumway, 2003) if one interprets sentiment as
subjective expected present discounted utility rather than emotional risk tolerance.
7 Bartels (2002) and Gaines et al. (2007) document a partisan bias in perceptions of changes in economic performance
and military outcomes, and Alesina et al. (2018) shows that political party affiliation determines how new information
differentially changes reported beliefs. Subsequent work studies the roles of selective exposure, selective attention,
motivated processing, and respondent bias (cheerleading) and incentives (Prior, 2007; Prior et al., 2015; Bullock et al.,
2015).

3

many months following the election, consistent with investors being aware that asset prices do not
rapidly incorporate their party-specific beliefs and so knowing that they need not react immediately to this change in beliefs. As additional evidence that supports the predictions of theoretical
models with heterogeneous (non-Bayesian) updating of beliefs (Miller, 1977; Harris and Raviv,
1993; Harrison and Kreps, 1978; Morris, 1996; Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003; Banerjee and Kremer,
2010; Simsek, 2013), we show that the total amount of trading among the investors in our sample
rises following the election. Rational expectations models of asset prices have been largely unable
to match portfolio heterogeneity and the volume of trading.8
While there are many existing approaches to modelling differences in beliefs, our results are
most directly supportive of models that link heterogeneity in beliefs to identity.9 In particular,
building on Akerlof and Kranton (2000), Bénabou and Tirole (2011) develops a model of stakedependent beliefs in which people’s investment choices are affected by what their allocations
would imply about their political beliefs. In this interpretation, the election made political identity
more salient and solid for Republicans (more fragile for Democrats), and so led to portfolio reallocation to equities (safer assets for Democrats). By controlling for county of residence we control
for differences in the supply of information, like differences in local newspapers or access to cable
news. Thus our findings are consistent with differences in beliefs being “deep” like identity and
causing differences in information sources rather than the reverse.
Related literature While there is growing literature on the effect of political polarization in the
United States on both economic outcomes and reported beliefs, prior papers have found inconclusive or no results on how elections affect household behavior. Most closely related to our paper, Bonaparte et al. (2017) finds no significant or stable correlation during 1988–2000 between
investors’ party affiliations and the equity shares of their portfolios using self-reported data from
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.10 Kaustia and Torstila (2011) shows that left-wing voters in Finland are less likely to hold stocks than right-wing voters, but again without controlling
for differences in the exposure of labor income or local economic performance to political risks.
We advance this line of research both by studying an historically large political shock and by using much larger and more detailed administrative data on millions of typical investors so that we
control for the main direct channels through which changes in policies could differentially impact
8 The variation in portfolio positions and the volume of trade in assets are significantly underestimated by quantitative rational expectations models (Guiso et al., 2002; Calvet et al., 2007; Curcuru et al., 2010). Barber and Odean (2008)
documents the transaction cost of over-trading among a sample of active traders.
9 Examples of more general models include Brunnermeier and Parker (2005), Hansen and Sargent (2010), Gennaioli
and Shleifer (2010), and Mailath and Samuelson (2020) for example.
10 Using account-level data from a brokerage firm, Bonaparte et al. (2017) also finds differences in the composition of
equity held related to differences in party affiliation, but without controlling for possible differences in real economic
exposure that should also cause such differences. We find no evidence of differential changes in the composition of
equity held in our data.

4

investors. Our work is also related to papers that document differences in professional behaviors
by political affiliation (Hong and Kostovetsky, 2012; Kempf and Tsoutsoura, forthcoming). Also
consistent with our findings but using professional situation as a measure of people’s different
models of the world, Linnainmaa et al. (2021) shows that professional portfolio advice correlates
with personal portfolio choices across investment advisers (see also Cheng et al., 2014). Again,
our contribution is to rule out many ways in which rational theories could rationalize observed
differences in behavior unrelated to differences in beliefs.
Our results are also related to research showing that investors seem to incorrectly update in
response to idiosyncratic or private information, typically by over-weighting information from
their own past experiences or friends (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2000; Vissing-Jørgensen, 2003; Malmendier and Nagel, 2011; Cookson and Niessner, 2020; Bailey et al., 2018).
There is also ongoing research on whether local aggregate consumer spending responds differently to electoral outcomes depending on the dominant local political affiliation (e.g. Gerber and
Huber, 2009, 2010; Mian et al., forthcoming). These analyses focus on measuring local aggregate
effects, and do not look to separate the beliefs channel from differences in real economic effects.
We contribute (a little) to this literature by analyzing the role of beliefs in differences in saving rates
in Section IX.A.
Finally, our paper also contributes to an older literature providing indirect evidence that investors interpret public signals differently. The volume of asset trading rises after public signals
(e.g. Kandel and Pearson, 1995), survey beliefs or stated forecasts widen (e.g. Bamber et al., 1999;
Carlin et al., 2014), and stock prices move in predictable ways (see the survey Hong and Stein,
2007) that are correlated with economic disagreement (Li and Li, 2021).

I

The 2016 US Election

The 2016 US national election is almost uniquely suited for measuring how households who believe in different political models of the world update in response to a publicly observable signal.
First, the outcome of the 2016 national election was a very public event.11 Thus, our results are
unlikely to be due to differences in attention. Conditional on observing the outcome, households
may process the information at different speeds or take different amounts of time to act, but there
is no ex ante reason to believe that this differs by party affiliation.
Second, this election was not correlated with other significant events. Such a correlation would
weaken our claim that the differences we uncover are due to different interpretations about a given
piece of news about future economic policies and performance.
11 While the outcome of the presidential race was highly unlikely and the main news revealed by the election, we
measure the effect of all the electoral outcomes including for example the fact that the Republican party won a majority
in the US Senate, an event with roughly even odds prior to the election.

5

Third, this presidential election, and the Republican party achieving a majority in the Senate,
constitute a very large and unexpected change in likely future US economic policy. While all
presidential elections affect policy, the 2016 election involved two candidates with quite different
policy prescriptions. More importantly, the outcome of the election was unexpected. For most
other types of news about the economy or other changes in governance, such as most elections,
legislation, and court decisions, information percolates slowly into the economy and the timing of
its arrival is hard to pinpoint.
For a measure of the probability of the outcome of the presidential election, we consider the
market prices of two contracts traded on Betfair that pay $1 conditional on the respective party
winning the election. State prices of course reflect marginal utilities as well as probabilities, but
Betfair is a UK-based internet betting exchange and because of US regulations, it is hard for American investors to enter this market.12 Thus, these prices differ from probabilities only to the extent
that the marginal utility of the UK investors is different across outcomes of the US presidential
election. The market predicted a Democratic victory the entire year before the election and with
roughly 75% likelihood during the six months prior to the election rising to over 80% on the eve
of the election (see Appendix Figure A.1). This stability contrasts slightly with polling data (which
is survey-based hypothetical choice data) which has larger swings around events like national
conventions and in which the odds appeared close to even at times.
Fourth, we can use differences in political affiliation as ex ante measures of differences in
investors’ models of the world. This measure is not derived from any economic behavior like
portfolio allocation, for which differences might be directly due to differences in preferences like
risk aversion or differences in income dynamics and resulting hedging needs. That said, a correlation between political affiliation and preference or hedging needs is of course possible, since
beliefs about the economy are not randomly assigned but form endogenously. So our analysis
will provide evidence that while there are ex ante differences in the portfolios of Republicans
and Democrats on average, the changes in portfolio allocations in response to the election are
not driven by these ex ante differences in economic exposure.13 A related benefit is that we can use
other household-level data that measures political affiliation to show how household responses
differ along other dimensions, and in particular, we present evidence on survey measures of economic beliefs in Section II.
All four features of this event are important for our study and important to consider in any
12 Alternative sources of betting market data on elections are Intrade, the Iowa Electronic Market (IEM), and PredictIt.
Intrade shut down in 2013. IEM is open to US households but is capped at $500 and does not trade a contract on the
outcome of the election (only contracts based on vote shares). PredictIt also has capped trading, and like the IEM, is
relatively small.
13 It is also the case that political affiliation may be associated with different views of the likelihood of the outcomes
of the 2016 election or the policies that are implemented conditional on the outcome. These are subsumed into what we
measure.

6

study of the relationship between beliefs and behavior. In our case, people of different party affiliations are continually responding to all sorts of information and changes in their economic
environment. And our hypothesis is that they are responding differently maybe along many dimensions of identity. Without the ability to differentiate households ex ante and without a large,
public signal, we could not separate the belief-driven portfolio response of households to the election from the effects of other factors.14

II

Reported Beliefs

Prior research shows that Republicans and Democrats interpret political events differently and
that this leads to different reported economic expectations.15 This section builds directly on Curtin
(2016, 2017) which shows that in the University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Confidence
(SCC), Republicans report much more optimism about the economy following the election while
Democrats report more pessimism.16 We use both the usual monthly data on reported economic
expectations in the SCC and special questions that the survey added about political affiliation from
June to October 2016 and from February to April 2017. The survey does not contain zip code or
county of residence, nor can we replicate the sample of RIs in the SCC, so instead we analyze
the subsample of households that hold stocks (63% of the sample weighted, 65% of the sample
unweighted). The results are nearly identical for the entire SCC sample.
Our first result is that the election appears to have a dramatic effect on expectations of future
national economic performance. Figure 1a shows the average response among people with different party affiliations to the question “Looking ahead, which would you say is more likely – that
in the country as a whole we’ll have continuous good times during the next 5 years or so, or that
we will have periods of widespread unemployment or depression, or what?” and we index the
answers as Good times = 5, Good with qualifications = 4, Pro-con = 3, Bad with qualifications =
2, and Bad times = 1. On average, Republicans change from slightly pessimistic before the election to highly optimistic after, and Democrats the reverse. Confirming this difference, Figure 1b
shows the same large changes in expectations of the unemployment rate in a year. The reported
large changes in beliefs about future national economic performance generate a desire to change
exposures to national economic performance in investment portfolios.
Our second result is that there are no similar large changes in people’s reported expectations
14 To the extent that the arrival of other information also causes households with different political affiliations to
behave differently, then it will bias our measured responses. How big is this bias? As we show, during the period before
the election, the portfolios of households of different political affiliations behaved similarly, consistent with the arrival
of little political news or other news that might be differentially interpreted. See our discussion in Section IV.
15 See Conover et al. (1987); Bartels (2002); Gaines et al. (2007); Gillitzer and Prasad (2018); Alesina et al. (2018).
16 Das et al. (2020) finds that reported beliefs about future macroeconomic outcomes are persistently different by
socioeconomic status.

7

about their own economic circumstances. Figure 2a plots by party affiliation the average answer to:
“During the next 12 months, do you expect your income to be higher or lower than during the past
year?” Democrats are more likely to expect higher income before the election, but the advantage
is small. Following the election, Republicans on average have higher reported expectations and
Democrats lower, but the changes are moderate and the ultimate differences small. In contrast,
Figure 2b shows the changes in expectations of whether business conditions overall will be better
or worse in a year and shows a much larger swing. This result suggests that changes in people’s
behavior after the election are due to changes in beliefs about the aggregate economy and not
responses to changes in beliefs about their own individual economic situations, such as changes in
expected labor income that might make them more or less likely to invest in equity.

III

Data

III.A

Party Affiliation

The particular measure of different models of the world that we use is political party affiliation.
Our main measure of likely political affiliation is based on publicly available data on individual
campaign donations during the 2015-2016 election cycle from the Federal Election Commission
aggregated to the zip code level. We restrict attention to contributions from individuals to political
action committees associated with the two main parties or with their presidential nominees and
with at least $20 million in donations (see Appendix A.1 for further details). For each zip code,
we count the number of donors to each party.17 We limit our analysis to zip codes with at least
10 donating individuals and measure the Republican contribution share of a zip code as the number
of donors to the Republican party or the Republican presidential nominee divided by the total
number of donors in that zip code. Appendix Figure A.2 shows the geographical distribution of
the Republican contribution share.
For robustness, we also confirm that our results hold for three alternative measures of likely political affiliation. First, we consider the dollar-weighted version of Republican contribution share
defined as the dollars donated to the Republication party or the Republican presidential nominee
divided by the total amount donated in that zip code to either party. Second, we use data on votes
for the presidential election at the county level and define the Republican share of a county as the
number of votes for the Republican candidate divided by the total number of votes to both parties’
candidates.18 Appendix Figure A.3 shows that the Republican contribution share and Republican
vote share line up well at the county level, despite the limited number of individuals that make in17 We

find that donations weighted by people are more precise and more differentiating than donations weighted by
dollars. Our hypothesis is that this is because the value-weighted donations measure is sensitive to outliers; a single
wealthy donor can swing the measure for the whole area.
18 Data are from David Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections at uselectionatlas.org.

8

dividual contributions (the median coverage by zip code is 0.3% of the population). Finally, we use
county-level vote shares for the Republican presidential candidate in the 2012 election (eliminating any sui generis effects of particular candidates in 2016). All of our measures surely have some
mismeasurement. To the extent that mismeasurement is classical, our main results are attenuated.

III.B

Household Portfolios

Our main data are anonymized, account-level data on financial holdings from a large US financial
institution. We have access to anonymized information on all accounts held directly at the firm by
individual investors. For these accounts, we observe end-of-month account balances and holdings,
and all inflows, outflows, and transfers at a daily frequency. We observe assets at the security level
(identified by CUSIP) for 92% of wealth. For the remaining 8% we observe the characteristics of
the fund the wealth is invested in. We aggregate all accounts – pre-tax, taxable, and untaxed –
across all members of a household and track household portfolios.19 The data cover millions of
households and trillions of dollars in financial wealth.
We also have access to some information on the characteristics of the investors themselves. In
addition to wealth information on all households, we observe age, gender, marital status, and zip
code for the vast majority of individuals.20 We define the head of the household by selecting the
individual with the highest total assets (or the older individual if all assets are jointly held), and we
use the head’s characteristics as that of the household for non-financial information like age and for
employment information. We can construct an employer indicator variable for a substantial subset
of households. In addition, we use the employer’s NAICS code to assign each such household to a
three-digit industry. For a subset of these households, we also observe annual labor income of the
head of household. Our main sample uses information from one year before to one year after the
election, from October 31, 2015 to October 31, 2017.
While this data provides a unique view of retirement savings and the portfolio allocations of
US households, there are two potential weaknesses of our data. First, while we observe a significant share of US households, this is obviously not a randomly selected sample. In particular, most
observed household wealth is retirement savings and few households have a very high net worth
(as we document subsequently). Our analysis does not require a random sample, but we would
like to understand the relationship between our sample and the US population. The second potential weakness is that we do not necessarily observe all the investable wealth of the households in
our sample. One way this occurs is that we only observe one member of the household for some
19 Where there are multiple households that co-own a given retail account, we assign each account to a single individual by selecting the (oldest) owner with the highest total assets. This yields a unique mapping from investment accounts
to households.
20 The firm data include some variables obtained through a commercial consumer database. Part of the data on marital
status comes from this database and we treat entries that were not collected at the household level as missing.

9

households. The other is that some households have investable wealth at other institutions.
To address these issues, we select a subsample of our data that meets a set of criteria that is
likely to be reasonably representative of the US population that also meets this set of criteria. We
focus on households with moderate levels of retirement wealth, which we call retirement investors
(RIs). Specifically, we define RIs as households of working age – heads of households between the
ages of 25 and 64 – without extremely high or low retirement wealth, defined as all wealth in
retirement saving accounts of all types (excluding defined benefit plans and Social Security).
We use the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to understand how the population of RIs
compares to the US population and how well the wealth and portfolio holdings of the RI subsample of our account-level data compare to the RI subsample in the US. We focus on households with
some retirement wealth. Using the 2016 SCF, we run quantile regressions of the log of retirement
wealth on a second-order polynomial in age. We then drop households with retirement wealth below the estimated 10th percentile or above the 90th by age. This RI subsample of the SCF captures
31.4% of the US population, 32.0% of retirement wealth, and 24.8% of investable wealth held by
households in the US according to the SCF.21 Investable wealth is defined as money market funds
(MMFs), non-money market funds, individual stocks and bonds, quasi-liquid retirement wealth,
and other managed accounts.22 Figure 3 shows the wealth distributions of the US population and
of our subsample in the 2016 SCF.
Applying the same cutoffs to our data provides a sample of millions of investors and well more
than a trillion dollars in investable wealth.23 The first panel of Figure 4 shows that the retirement
wealth distribution of our RI sample of households lines up well with that measured by the SCF.
The second panel of Figure 4 shows that our data also match reasonably well the distribution of
total investable wealth in the SCF, but that our data is missing some non-retirement wealth mainly
for households with more than $500,000 in investable wealth.
To characterize portfolio risk taking, we classify fund and security holdings into equity, bonds,
21 The

age cutoff selects 69.7% of the US population, 65.8% of retirement wealth, and 58.3% of investable wealth
according to the SCF. Within the 25–64 age group, RIs are 45.1% of the population and hold 48.6% of retirement wealth
(roughly 50% of retirement wealth is held by the top 10 percent) and 42.6% of investable wealth. For age 30, the 10th
and 90th percentile cutoffs are roughly $1,500 and $75,000, and for age 64 they are roughly $8,000 and $1,000,000.
22 In the SCF, “other managed accounts” includes personal annuities and trusts with an equity interest and managed
investment accounts. Excluded categories of financial wealth are checking and savings accounts, saving bonds, certificates of deposit, cash value of life insurance, and other financial assets.
23 For use in our sample, because we select our sample at the initial date October 31, 2015, we first translate the
retirement wealth cutoffs from the SCF at the end of 2016 to cutoffs at the initial date by matching the corresponding
quantiles of retirement wealth in our dataset between the two dates. We perform two additional screens in our sample.
First, we select households with at least 50% of investable wealth in observable portfolio assets. Because of account
types, we cannot measure characteristics like market exposures for a limited set of assets. Average holdings in these
assets are less than 1.3% of total investable wealth. This restriction excludes only 1.0% of households in our RI sample.
Second, we limit ourselves to households that have portfolio holdings between 20% and 500% of initial assets in every
month (83% of the full sample). This gives us a balanced panel and drops people who start or stop using the firm during
this period.

10

cash, and alternative assets (e.g. real estate and precious metals).24 We calculate market betas by
regressing fund and security excess returns on the market excess return over the period 2006–2019,
requiring at least 24 months of return observations. We also use other security-level information,
such as international and sector exposures. The details are in Appendix A.2.
Column 1 of Table 1 shows the details of the portfolios held by our RI sample, as of just prior
to the election shock. Our average RI has $138,100 in investable wealth, of which 84 percent is in
retirement accounts. More than seventy percent of wealth is invested in equity (the sum of directly
held equity, equity funds, and the equity amount of funds that invest across asset types), and the
portfolios have an average market beta of 0.74 (0.72 if households are weighted by wealth). The
second column of Table 1 shows that, relative to the estimates from the SCF, our data capture most
retirement wealth of RIs but, while we match median total investable wealth well, our data misses
the mean of non-retirement investable wealth, primarily due to missing wealth among high net
worth households (see Figure 4).
Column 1 of Table 2 shows that the average age of household heads in our RI sample is 46
years old, 44% of household heads are female, and 73% are married. Our sample of working age
households has a similar age distribution as the corresponding SCF sample of RIs (see Appendix
Figure A.4). The average household income is $101,200 and the median is $77,300.
Figure 5a shows a scrambled map of the share of households in each US county that are in our
sample of RIs: we calculate the population share of households that are in our sample by county,
and then randomly reallocate the shares across counties in each state to preserve anonymity. Figure 5b shows the density of the share of the population in each county that is in our RI dataset. We
remind the reader that RI households represent only a third of the US population (according to the
SCF) and that we are using the term household when we in fact may only observe one of two (or
more) earning and investing members.
Finally, we use each investor’s zip code of residence one year prior to the election to link investors to our zip code or county measures of political party affiliation. Our sample is tilted towards households that live in Democratic zip codes according to our contributions measure.25
Tables 1 and 2 show the distribution of asset holdings and demographics by party affiliation
of the zip code of the households just prior to the election. There are differences across zip codes
associated with party affiliation, but they are generally small. The average equity share varies by
less than a percent across groups, with Democratic zip codes having slightly higher equity shares
on average. The differences are even smaller for the average market beta of investor portfolios.
24 Holdings in alternative assets are on average less than 1% of total assets and we do not separately analyze this
investment class.
25 Appendix Figures A.5a and A.5b show the distribution of our households across areas with different political affiliations. While in the regression analysis all households are weighted equally, in the graphical analysis we construct
groups symmetrically around the 50% mark. The findings are consistent.

11

Nevertheless, in our analysis, we control for pre-election equity share, as well as many individual
demographic characteristics.
While both the share of equity and the market beta of the portfolios of households with different political affiliations are quite similar prior to the election, we do find some differences in the
composition of equity holdings. While equity portfolios are similar across zip codes in terms of
market betas, the share allocated to funds, and the share of international equity holdings, there
are differences in the sectoral composition of stock holdings and in particular with respect to industry performance immediately following the election.26 Although allocations to specific sectors
are a limited fraction of overall portfolios, we find that households in zip codes with different predominant political affiliations hold significantly different exposures to winning and losing sectors.
Table 1 shows that the most Republican zip codes hold on average 6.5% of their total equity in winning sectors, relative to 4.8% for the most Democratic zip codes. For losing industries, the picture
is reversed with the most Democratic zip codes holding more than 4.7% of their equity in losing
industries and the most Republican zip codes holding less than 3.5%.
Given these differences it is important that our analysis in the next two sections shows that
these ex ante sectoral differences in portfolio holdings do not explain our findings of differential
post-election movements in equity shares, trading, and portfolio betas by party affiliation. We
do this in three ways. First, we control for these differences in ex-ante portfolio compositions in
regression analysis. Second, we analyze price-constant portfolios that exclude all post-election
differences in returns from portfolios. Third, this difference in holdings is significantly due to people over-weighting their employer’s stock in their portfolios, and much of our analysis compares
workers at the same firm.

IV

Household Portfolio Reallocation

This section shows that likely Republican households increase the exposure of their portfolios to
US economic growth after the 2016 presidential election relative to likely Democratic households.
We show that this effect is not driven by passive appreciation and is driven by trading of households that are actively reallocating their portfolios. The next section builds the case that this effect
is caused by differential updating of beliefs by showing that this finding is robust to many controls
for differences in preferences or hedging needs across households.
26 We use Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) codes to measure exposure to different sectors. We use
the Morningstar benchmark for sector mutual funds and Compustat/CRSP for directly-held equity. The sectors are
energy, materials, industrials, consumer discretionary, consumer staples, health care, financials, information technology,
telecommunication services, utilities, and real estate. We classify an industry as a winner or loser from its stock market
response from the end of October through to the end of 2016. The winning industries are financials, telecommunication
services, energy, materials, and industrials, while the losing ones are consumer staples, utilities, information technology,
health care, and real estate. Consumer discretionary is in the middle and is considered neither.

12

To begin, we simply plot the data. Figure 6 shows the change in the average portfolio share of
equities (relative to October 31, 2016) for households in zip codes with different shares of contributions to each party, relative to their baseline shares at the end of October 2016. Figure 6a displays
equally-weighted portfolio shares, Figure 6b displays the value-weighted portfolio shares, which
sum the value of equity across all households in each group before dividing by total investable
wealth for that group.
First, for all groups, the share of wealth invested in equities decreases prior to the election,
which suggests that something caused reduced investment in the stock market regardless of party
affiliation.27 This rebalancing might have been election-related – due, for example, to information
revealed during the political race or the approaching uncertainty of the election – or it could simply
represent rebalancing after a half decade of relatively good stock market returns. After the election,
the equity share rebounds for all groups, primarily due to high stock market returns).
Second, and our main result, the share of wealth invested in equities rises in predominantly Republican zip codes relative to predominantly Democratic zip codes following the election. Specifically, households living in Republican zip codes increase their equity exposure by roughly 0.4%
percent of their wealth relative to those in the most Democratic zip codes, consistent with increased
optimism about the economy by Republicans relative to Democrats.
Third, there are minimal differences in the evolution of the portfolio shares in equity across
areas with different political affiliations prior to the election. During this time, there is information arriving about the likely outcome of the election, but the total change in probability over this
period prior to the election is smaller than that on the one day of the election (see Appendix Figure A.1). The similarity of the movements in the equity share before the election is consistent with
our evidence that there are only small prior differences in equity shares across zip codes with different political leanings. These zip codes are surely not the same, but are also not affected very
differently by economic news (and the limited political news) in the year prior to the election.28
We find similar results for long bonds and cash-like securities. Households in zip codes that
are predominantly Republican decrease the shares of their portfolios invested in both bonds and
cash-like assets (including MMMFs) following the election relative to those in zip codes that are
predominantly Democratic (see Appendix Figures A.6 and A.7).
One concern with these results so far is the possibility that these movements may be due to
inactivity, initial differences in holdings, and appreciation resulting from the post-election stock
market increase following the election. Republicans may hold more equity or equities with higher
27 Roughly two thirds of the pre-election decline comes from allocation decisions of households (see Figures 8a
and A.10). Post election, allocation decisions on average are equity neutral.
28 Figure 6a does show a small rise in equity share in Democratic zip codes relative to Republican zip codes prior to the
election, which is consistent with the slowly increasing probability of a Democratic victory in the presidential election
during this period.

13

beta, and so might have had a disproportionate increase in the equity share of their portfolios due
to the post-election increase in stock prices. Like most wealth for the typical American household,
the majority of the wealth that we observe is retirement wealth which is notably “sleepy.” While
we address these concerns in a regression framework subsequently, we present three transparent
pieces of evidence that reject this hypothesis here.
First, we find larger differential effects by party affiliation when we focus on households that
are more active in the past, where an “active” household is defined as one that had at least one
monthly portfolio reallocation due to trading that changed the equity share by at least 5% (in absolute value) during the year November 2014 to October 2015 (the year prior to our main sample).
This sample is 11.1 percent of our original sample (see Table 2). Figure 7a shows that active investors in mostly Republican zip codes have a much larger relative increase in equity share after
the election, on the order of 1.5% of their investable wealth on average. (Appendix Figures A.8a
and A.8b show the corresponding plots for long bonds and safe assets, respectively, for the sample
of active investors.) These effects translate into differences in the overall market betas of portfolios
by likely political affiliation. Figure 7b shows that movements in market betas of active investors
are also very similar prior to the election across political affiliations, and diverge post election, with
market beta rising relatively more in Republican zip codes post election.
Second, we measure the difference in active rebalancing in two different ways. The composition of an investor’s portfolio is changed by revaluations, reallocations, and inflows and outflows
related to deposits and withdrawals. We measure rebalancing into equity by focusing on changes
in equity share driven by either transfers of assets into or out of equity or withdrawals or inflows
that change equity shares.
Our first method to measure rebalancing is simply to construct and track hypothetical portfolios as if there were no changes in valuations of funds or securities. Figure 8a plots the equity
share of these hypothetical price-constant portfolios and shows that prior to the election, households are rebalancing out of equity in a nearly identical way across the distribution of zip codes by
political affiliation. After the election, Republican zip codes actively increase their equity shares
by reallocating wealth from safe assets into equity, while primarily Democratic zip codes decrease
their equity shares by reallocating wealth out of equity into bonds and cash. The total reallocation
is roughly the same size as the total difference shown in Figure 6. Note that in Figure 8a we also
observe mostly Republican zip codes reducing their equity shares slightly more than other zip
codes over the year prior to the election, which is consistent with the small amount of news that
comes out pre-election as the chances of a Democratic victory rise. Figure 8b again shows similar
patterns for market betas before and after the election. (Appendix Figures A.9a and A.9b show the
corresponding plots for long bonds and safe assets, respectively, of price-constant portfolios.)
It is worth noting that while Figure 6 shows that party affiliation and the election do not explain
14

much of the temporal variation in zip code between the most Republican and most Democratic
zip codes, most of this is due to passive behavior and market returns. Removing market return,
Figure 8a shows a much higher share of the temporal variation in equity share between these
groups is driven by political variation in beliefs.
Second, we measure excess equity trading for household i in month t as
Excess Equity Tradesi,t =

Equity Tradesi,t

Equity Sharei,t
Assetsi,0

1 Total

Tradesi,t

,

(1)

where Equity Tradesi,t is the sum of all transactions in equity securities by household i in month
t (positive if buying, negative if selling), Equity Sharei,t
t

1

is the equity share at the end of month

1, Total Tradesi,t is the sum of all transactions in all securities by household i in month t, and we

scale by initial household assets, Assetsi,0 . Appendix Figure A.10 shows cumulative excess equity
trades from the end of October 2015. We again find that the relative movement in portfolio share is
driven by rebalancing and not by ex ante differences in portfolios and differences in post-election
performance. Appendix Figures A.11a and A.11b show the same plots for excess bond and cash
trades (defined analogously).
While these results present the data in a transparent manner, they do not show that changes
in beliefs are the driving force for these re-allocations rather than differences in preferences or
differential changes in hedging needs due to differential changes in the stochastic process of labor
income or the local local economy. Much existing research relates reported beliefs to economic
behaviors (see Manski, 2018) and to portfolio choice in particular (e.g. Vissing-Jørgensen, 2003;
Ameriks et al., 2020; Giglio et al., forthcoming). In general, however, many factors change both
behavior and beliefs, and so may contaminate any analysis of the effect of beliefs on behavior.
Because we have identified a particular source of variation in beliefs, we can address the main
ways in which the election may have directly impacted behavior other than through beliefs. For
example, the election outcome raised the probability of reductions in personal and corporate tax
rates, changes in personal tax deductions through itemization, increases in barriers to trade, and
reductions in various regulations, and the stock prices of companies in different industries were
impacted quite differently. To the extent that affiliates of one party or the other are impacted
differently by these policies, or tend to work for or live near winning industries, then the political
outcome may differentially affect their future incomes and cost of living. The next section provides
evidence that the differences in rebalancing are not driven by the different economic effects of the
election but rather by different interpretations of the election. These results thus lend credence to
the informativeness of reported expectations data.

15

V

Quantitative Analysis Controlling for Alternative Channels

To control for differences in economic outcomes and hedging needs due to the election result and to
quantify the differences in portfolio allocations across households, we now run a set of regressions
of changes in household equity shares on the Republican share of donations at the zip code level.
We continue to study portfolio changes between one year before the election and one year after the
election.

V.A

Quarterly Panel Regressions

We start our quantitative analysis by running quarterly panel regressions. We use portfolios exactly one year before the election to construct initial positions and create a sample of portfolio
holdings every three months, starting with the end of January 2016 and ending with the end of
October 2017, so we have four observations before the election (denoted

3,

2,

1, and 0 for

October 31, 2016) and four periods after the election (1, 2, 3, and 4).
We estimate an equation of the form:
Pi,t =

Â ( bs Rz(i) + qs0 Xi )

t=s

s 6 =0

+ tt + ti + hi,t ,

(2)

where Pi,t is household i’s portfolio share in equity at time t, Rz(i) is the time-invariant Republican
share of donations in zip code z(i ), Xi are individual control variables,

t=s

is an indicator variable

which takes the value 1 when period t = s, and tt and ti are period-specific and individual-specific
intercepts, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.
Our main effects of interest are the coefficients on Republican share in each three-month period
following the election (b t for t = 1, 2, 3, 4) which measure the differential effect of Republican share
relative to October 31 (because we impose b 0 = 0).
It is important to emphasize that the effects of our control variables are allowed to be different
in every three-month period, just like the effect of the Republican share. Thus, when we control
for a variable, we are not controlling for its average effect pre-election and post-election, but we
are controlling for differences related to this control variable in the specific quarter.29
To show that the differences in portfolios that we observe are due to differences in beliefs rather
than differential economic outcomes or hedging demands, we make use of many control variables,
Xi , related to differences in preferences, incomes, other wealth, or the ways these factors are exposed to economic policies. Our baseline control variables include the initial portfolio equity share,
age, gender, marital status, log initial wealth, and log labor income in 2015, which are as noted all
interacted with quarterly indicator variables. Initial equity shares and financial wealth are mea29 We

force q0 = 0 to avoid collinearity with the individual effects.

16

sured as of October 2015. These controls are designed to confirm that our quantitative results are
not biased by initial differences in wealth and portfolios that might be due to heterogeneity in,
for example, risk aversion, as investors that differ ex ante in endowments or risk preferences select different portfolios and are therefore differentially affected by the election outcome. Portfolio
allocations are also significantly mean reverting, which is most obvious at the extremes of the distribution of initial portfolio shares, since shares are bounded by zero and one, but happens across
the whole distribution. We additionally control for ex-ante differences in sectoral allocations (as
discussed at the end of Section III) and for zip code house price growth between 2010 and 2015 in
the baseline. We use the all-homes Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI) as a measure of house prices
at the zip code level.
Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows the cumulative change, from the end of October 2016, in the equity share of Republican zip codes relative to Democratic zip codes from this baseline regression.
During the first three months following the election, people in a zip code with only Republican
donations increase their holdings of equity by 0.40 percent of their portfolio relative to a zip code
with only Democratic donations, rising to 0.62 percent by the end of the second three-month period following the election. The cumulative effect further increases slightly between six and twelve
months after the election.
Since equity shares also reflect changes in asset valuations and do not only reflect active decisions by the account owners, we also report the results of the same baseline regression but now
using the hypothetical price-constant equity share measure from Section IV as outcome variable.
This measure is purely driven by active rebalancing decisions. Panel (b) of Figure 9 reports similar
effects for this measure. We will use the transactions-based price-constant equity share measure as
our main outcome variable in later tests.
Finally, we control for any possible channels through which the election outcome and the dynamics of future policy might impact investors differentially through their employer or locality
and so change their portfolio behavior other than through beliefs. We replace all the county-level
and employer-level control variables with a fixed effect for each employer-county pair. This version of equation (2) then compares, in each quarter, investors working at the same firm and living
in the same county while still controlling for the effect of all the individual-level characteristics
in that quarter (and an individual effect across quarters). Panel (c) of Figure 9 show the effects
of the election outcome on investors equity shares controlling for these employer–county–period
fixed effects. These quarterly panel regressions show the same effect of the election on portfolios:
Democrat’s reduce their holdings of equity while Republicans inscrease theirs. Panel (d) of Figure 9 shows that these results are due to differences in active trading not differences in passive
appreciation.30
30 Appendix

Tables A.2 and A.3 report the estimated coefficients in these panel regressions of equity shares and price-

17

V.B

Annual Portfolio Changes

Having reported the main quantitative estimates in quarterly panel regressions with individual
fixed effects, we now switch to regressions in annual first differences for our subsequent analyses.
These regressions show the same patterns in portfolio allocation changes at a yearly frequency, but
are more tractable for exposition and computation. In particular, we estimate an equation of the
form
DPi,t = b 0 Rz(i) + b 1 Rz(i) Postt + q00 Xi,t

1

+ q10 Xi,t 1 Postt + tt + hi,t ,

(3)

where t = 0 is the period October 31, 2015 to October 31, 2016, and t = 1 is the subsequent 12
months, where DPi,t ⌘ Pi,t

Pi,t

1,

in period t = 1. The controls Xi,t

1

and where Postt is an indicator variable that takes the value 1
include the lagged equity share and other covariates that are

either time-invariant or measured at t

1.

Table 3 reports estimates of equation (3) for changes in the equity share of price-constant portfolios (the corresponding findings for realized equity shares are in Appendix Table A.4). For consistency, we restrict the regression sample to RIs for which we observe a complete set of controls,
so that sample sizes do not change across columns. This subsample of households with complete
controls forms 27.7% of the full RI sample. In Appendix A.3.1, we show that our findings are not
driven by this sample selection and that the results extend to less restrictive samples.
The first column of Table 3 reports estimates for the specification without any controls Xi,t

1.

As before, we find that likely Republican households significantly increase their equity holdings
relative to likely Democratic households after the election shock. In the remaining columns, we
show that the main effect remains very similar as we control for a large number of variables that
measure possible differences in wealth or hedging needs that might be correlated with the political
affiliation of zip code of residence.
The second column shows the results for the baseline set of controls. We report the main coefficients on political affiliations, as well as the coefficients on the most important controls. In the
year prior to the election, likely Republicans mildly reduce their equity share relative to likely
Democrats. After the election, likely Republicans significantly increase their equity share relative
to likely Democrats. The total post-election difference is 0.8, matching the previous cumulative
effect from quarterly panel regression with individual fixed effects as reported in panel (b) of Figure 9.
To control for ex-post differences in wealth growth, the third column includes ex-post realized
income growth from 2016 to 2017 and house price growth between 2015 and 2017. Columns (4)
and (5) control for any remaining differences in hedging needs due to employment opportunities.
constant equity shares, respectively, for the various sets of controls.

18

Column (4) includes an indicator variable for employer industry (3-digit NAICS).31 Column (5)
takes this control one step further by including indicators for each employer in each year. By
controlling for employer effects, we absorb any differences across households that are due to Republicans and Democrats working for different firms and therefore are differentially affected by
the election outcome in their expected labor income or due to differences in retirement investment
menus.
Columns (6) and (7) show that we still find that Republicans increase their relative equity share
when we control for detailed locational indicators. These indicators capture differences in local
economic conditions and the local effects of various economic policies that lead to ex-post heterogeneity in the effects of the election outcome on wealth and hedging needs. Specifically, we
control for regional variation with indicators for state and county. These indicators account for
potential differences in hedging needs related to the real effects of trade or immigration policies,
by absorbing differences in urbanicity, manufacturing shares, and firms’ exposure to import competition (Feenstra, 1996; Barrot et al., 2019). It is worth emphasizing again that, as in the previous
columns, all controls are interacted by annual indicators. The locational controls do not do much
to decrease the magnitude of our main finding.
Ultimately in column (8), we control for the main ways in which rational hedging demand
might change differentially in response to the election through the investor’s employer or through
their local economy. We still find the same differential trading behavior when we control for
employer–county–period fixed effects by including an indicator for each county interacted with
each employer interacted with each annual period. This specification compares people in the same
year working for the same employer and living in the same county but living in zip codes with
different party affiliations. The magnitudes of our main effects are highly significant although
somewhat reduced in magnitude, but this may occur because these indicator variables may be absorbing some valid variation, since our main measure of the effect of beliefs is a noisy measure of
party affiliation at the zip code level.
The results in this last column of Table 3 have interesting implications for the interpretation
of our findings related to work on differences in media and political beliefs, as discussed in the
introduction. By controlling for county, we are largely controlling for access to information since
people in the same county likely have access to the same media for example. Thus, to the extent that the variation in beliefs across zip codes within a county is related to differences in the
consumption of media, then, these differences in media represent differences in the demand for
certain types of information. That is, we are not measuring the effect of exogenous differences in
media consumption, but the expression of individual (or rather zip code level) beliefs.32
31 The

results are similar for 2-digit and for 4-digit NAICS controls.
beliefs may be amplified or perpetuated by choice of media, they still represent choices driven by initial
political identity. Note however that our controls for supply are incomplete in the sense that new media platforms (e.g.
32 Although

19

Our main results are quite similar for our alternative measures of likely political affiliation in
2016 and for the 2012 Republican vote share by county (see Appendix Table A.5). Thus, our results
are not driven by something specific to donations (rather than votes) or by something particular
to the candidates in 2016 (although we do not have a way to adjust for differences in turnout). At
the one-year horizon with employer–state–period fixed effects, we find no statistically significant
evidence that changes over time in the intensity of county support matter above and beyond the
2012 vote shares.33
In sum, the regression analysis of this section confirms that the public signal of the 2016 election caused likely Republicans to increase their portfolio exposure to US growth relative to likely
Democrats, and that we find this behavior even when controlling for many measures of differences
in the real economic impact of the election, such as only using variation within people living in the
same county and working for the same employer. These results are consistent with survey beliefs
reported in Section II: households that are more optimistic on the future growth of the US economy
increase their exposure to assets that load on future economic performance.34
The relative changes in portfolios that we find are not quantitatively large. In part this is because we do not observe individual-level political affiliations, so that even quite Republican or
Democratic zip codes by our measures contain a mixture of Democratic and Republican investors.
However, in part our effects are not large because most of the wealth of retirement investors is
retirement wealth, and there is very little (active) trading in retirement accounts. As prior research
has shown, retirement savers in the US largely stick to their default portfolio allocations and trade
very rarely.
Due to infrequent rebalancing, the magnitudes of the coefficients of portfolio changes are modest on all explanatory variables. However, Table 3 shows that compared with key investor characteristics such as age, wealth, income, gender, and marital status, we find that the coefficient on
Twitter, Facebook, etc.) target at the individual level with little relation to geography. See the related work of Gentzkow
and Shapiro (2006), Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), and Martin and Yurukoglu (2017).
33 Not only can we use the 2012 vote share in our analysis of the 2016 election, but we can also conduct our same
analysis using rebalancing around the 2012 election. We perform an identical regression analysis on a data sample
from our proprietary data using our same procedure but just changing the dates to cover the year before and after the
2012 election. Appendix Figure A.12 shows the changes in equity shares around this election. The first few columns of
Appendix Table A.6, with plain equity shares and few controls, show Democrats increasing their equity shares relative
to Republicans following the 2012 election, opposite to the rebalancing that we find in 2016. However, the later columns
with more controls largely eliminate this effect, and we also find null results for price-constant equity shares in Appendix
Table A.7. Thus, with additional controls there is no differential effect of party affiliation on rebalancing following
the 2012 election. We conclude that there is not a general tendency for Republicans to increase their equity shares
following elections or when the market does well (as it did after the 2012 election), and that Democrats may have
become (relatively) more optimistic and (relatively) rebalanced into equity, but, consistent with the unsurprising nature
of the outcome of the 2012 election, this evidence is limited and only appears in some specifications.
34 Consistent with the survey evidence on beliefs as well as with theoretical models of belief heterogeneity, we interpret
our findings on portfolio allocations as the result of disagreement on expected stock market returns. It is however also
possible that the results (partially) reflect heterogeneity in beliefs on higher-order moments such as expected volatility
or tail risk in asset returns.

20

likely political affiliation is large. For example, in column (8) of Table 3, the magnitude of the
post-election difference between likely Republicans and likely Democrats is equivalent to an age
difference of 36 years, a difference in wealth of 377 log points, and a difference in income of 445
log points in the election response. Zip-code-level regressions in Table A.11 (further described in
Appendix A.3.2) also show that apart from initial equity shares, zip code political affiliations are
the most important variable for explaining post-election changes in portfolio allocations across zip
codes. However, most of the variation in portfolio changes is due to idiosyncratic factors, especially at the individual level – the overall R2 in Table 3 is 6.7% without fixed effects and 18.9% with
employer by county fixed effects.
In the next section, we show that our estimated main effect is much larger among households
that do reallocate their wealth.

VI

Inaction and Large Portfolio Changes

Having established our main results, we now show that the portfolio reallocation is due to a small
share of active investors who make large reallocations in their portfolios.
First, we focus on the effect among active investors. Table 4 performs the same analyses as
Table 3 on the subset of the population with an active portfolio reallocation during the year prior
to the pre-election year. An active portfolio reallocation is defined as an equity share change of
at least 5% caused by trading in a particular month. As in our graphical analysis, we find much
larger differential portfolio movements among active households. The relative increase in equity
share among likely Republicans who have made active reallocations is three times as large as that
for the general population of RIs.
We also analyze several other categorizations of more active or engaged investors, such as those
invested less in target date funds and those with greater past access and trading behavior in their
accounts. We relegate these results to Appendix Table A.8, but we find that the more active the
investors are that we include in the sample, the greater are the differences in reallocation. Notably,
relative reallocations are much greater – five times the baseline effect – among investors who made
active reallocations in each of the three years prior to the election (1.7 percent of RIs). Investors
who are less engaged, for example those who have a significant part of their assets in target date
funds or advised accounts, respond less than the average investor.35
We next turn to measuring the size of the portfolio adjustments made by the investors that
actively rebalance. As in our previous analysis, we continue to focus on hypothetical portfolios
35 Instead

of classifying investors by their engagement ex ante, we can also look at portfolio reallocation conditional
on active rebalancing ex post. Appendix Table A.9 shows the results of regressing annual portfolio changes on political
affiliation and various controls for the sample of investors that actively reallocate their portfolios in that particular year.
Not surprisingly, we find even larger effects.

21

constructed as if there were no changes in valuations of funds or securities. This allows us to
cleanly avoid changes in equity share driven by different returns on different investments. Figures 10a and 10b show the changes in equity shares as in Figure 8a, decomposed into small and
large portfolio changes. In the upper panel we take the average of (hypothetical) equity share
changes relative to October 2016 interacted by an indicator for the change being at least ten percent. In the lower panel we multiply the (hypothetical) equity share change by an indicator for the
change being at most ten percent. There is no noticeable differential active adjustment among the
investors making only small adjustments and effectively our entire measured effect comes from
investors making adjustments of greater than ten percent. In terms of what share of investors are
making these large trades, roughly one percent of investors make a trade of greater than 10 percent
in each month following the election.
To further characterize the extent to which our results are driven by large reallocations, we rerun our main analysis on the subsample of investors whose cumulative adjustment over the year
following the election exceeds X percent, for different values of X. Strikingly, only about a quarter
of the total relative portfolio reallocation comes from investors who adjust the equity shares of their
portfolios by less than 25%. A full half the measured effect comes from the few households that
increase or decrease the equity share of their portfolio by 50% or more. We display the complete
set of results in Appendix Figure A.13a.
What share of investors are making these large changes? Aggregated across the full year, 9.6%
of our RI sample reallocate so that their equity share changes by at least 10%, 4.3% reallocate for a
change of at least 25%, and 1.7% make a change of at least 50%.
We further find that rebalancing at the individual level is lumpy. Investors tend to make only
one large trade. Examining the cumulative difference in reallocation between the most Republican
zip codes and the most Democratic zip codes, we experiment with dropping all adjustments made
by investors after their first rebalancing of ten percent or greater. Almost the entire effect comes
from the first large adjustment made by each investor (as shown in Appendix Figure A.13b). In
sum, effectively no Republican and Democratic investors actively change their equity shares by
only a few percent in response to the election. Instead, a small share of investors make very large
changes in their portfolios in response to their different changes in their beliefs.
These results are consistent with previous studies which show that the typical American investor, whose wealth is primarily in retirement funds, trades very rarely (e.g. Choi et al., 2004).
The interesting question is: why? The majority of wealth in our sample is retirement wealth,
which has no fees associated with trading. Thus large monetary costs are an implausible explanation. Instead, inaction seems to be due to psychological or informational costs. This interpretation
is supported by our finding that investors who are more engaged with their portfolio allocations
respond more strongly, and those who have delegated or are less engaged respond less. While it is
22

possible that only a few households updated their beliefs following the election, this interpretation
is inconsistent with the evidence from survey beliefs in Section II.

VII

Trading Volume

A main motivation and implication of models with time-varying heterogeneous beliefs is that they
generate trade among agents, something that the canonical model is either silent about or, when
calibrated, tends to vastly under-predict. In this section we show that trading volume rises significantly following the election for our RI sample, consistent with these models and our interpretation
of the election as a public shock that caused different movements in different households’ beliefs.
We measure trades as the absolute value of the dollar amount of every purchase or sale of any
security s, and define the trading volume for household i in month t as:36
Trading Volumei,t =

1
2

Âs (|Buyi,s,t | + |Selli,s,t |)
,
Assetsi,0

(4)

where Buyi,s,t is the sum of all buying transactions for household i in month t of security s, Selli,s,t
is the sum of all selling transactions for that security by the household in that month, and the total
amount of trading is scaled by initial household assets Assetsi,0 . Since this trading includes purchases and sales from inflows and outflows, we also construct a measure of active trades, which are
trades limited to rebalancing across assets, excluding those associated with inflows and outflows.
Figure 11a plots average trading volume over time and shows that the volume of trade by
our sample of retirement investors the amount of trade rises significantly following the election.
Their average trading volume is low (relative to turnover in the overall stock market), roughly
2.25% per month prior to the election. Active trades are roughly 1% per month. Trading increases
significantly in the month following the election, reaching more than 3% per month in March
2017. Figure 11b shows that there is little difference in trading volume across the distribution of
political affiliation in zip codes, including those that are most politically balanced. This similarity
suggests that the Republicans and Democrats in non-homogeneous zip codes are both trading, just
in opposite directions.
In contrast, there is no noticeable increase in trading activity in US equity markets overall, even
in the submarket for ETFs. Presumably, this is because the trading of our sample is such a small
share of total trade in US equity markets. We confirm this both with total US equity market volume
and with the narrower ETF market volume, both from the CBOE (we plot these series in Appendix
Figures A.14a and A.14b).
36 Trading volume is winsorized at 100% to remove sensitivity to a small number of extreme outliers. This affects less
than 0.5% of the sample.

23

We conclude that the evidence on trading volume supports our hypothesis that this public
event was interpreted differently by people with different models of the world, but we also note
that this particular source of different beliefs can generate only a small amount of observed equity
trades.

VIII

Differences across Households and Accounts

Which characteristics of investors are associated with the largest differential responses to the election news? We characterize differences in the effect of the election by running triple difference regressions to measure differential effects by prior-year active rebalancing, age, wealth, and starting
equity share. We report the coefficients on the Republican contribution share and its interactions
in Table 5, where age, log wealth, and lagged equity share are all demeaned.
The interaction of Republican contribution share with active reallocation in the prior year in
column (2) highlights and confirms our previous results. The response in the equity shares of
households with active rebalancing in the prior year is almost four times as strong as those who
were not active. Turning to age in column (3), older households – those closer to retirement but
also with more wealth and income – have more differences in their portfolios by political affiliation
than younger households. Relative to a base difference of 0.87 percent, a ten year higher age is
associated with an additional difference in equity share changes of 0.51 percent between likely
Republicans and likely Democrats. Column (4) shows that equity share moves relatively more for
wealthier households, with a doubling of financial wealth implying a 0.25 percent greater relative
increase in equity shares by likely Republicans, and a doubling of income implying a 0.43 percent
greater relative increase in equity shares. The difference in reallocation is larger for investors with
relatively low starting equity shares, as shown in column (5). With the full set of demographic
interactions in column (6), age becomes less important, while heterogeneity by financial wealth,
income, and initial equity allocation remains highly significant.
Next, do households rebalance differently depending on the type of account they own, or do
we see differences across households that own different types of accounts? We find that there
are significant responses across all types of accounts, with larger responses for people with nonretirement accounts but more rebalancing in retirement accounts. Table 6 shows how the responses
differ across investors or different types of accounts held by RIs at the firm. The first column
presents our main results again, which largely represent the response in retirement accounts since
this is the vast majority of wealth held by our RIs. In the second column, we restrict the sample
to households that own personally advised accounts.37 Both pre- and post-election coefficients on
political affiliation are somewhat larger, but with very large standard errors when we insist on
37 A

common financial adviser line is “keep your politics out of your portfolio.”

24

including employer–county–year fixed effects. The third column shows a slightly lower but still
highly significant estimate for the subset of households with a single, unmarried household head.
Because we may only observe one member of a household, we are more confident that we observe
the full portfolio of unmarried investors. A possible explanation for the lower magnitude in this
sample is that these are typically younger investors with lower balances and a higher initial equity
allocation.
In the final five columns, we draw a distinction between retirement and non-retirement account behavior and owners. Given the prominence of retirement wealth in our sample, we find
similar results when we restrict attention to only retirement wealth (column (4)). We find that
investors that own non-retirement accounts (column (5)) tend to trade more than people without (column (6)) and therefore show bigger responses, but for these investors we find less reallocation in their non-retirement accounts (column (7)) than in their retirement accounts (column (8)), presumably for reasons of both lower transaction costs and no immediate tax ramifications (see Dammon et al., 2001). Hence, we find no evidence that reallocation happens more
in non-retirement accounts that may offer more flexibility in choosing asset allocations or have
shorter investment horizons.

IX

Extensions

IX.A

Household Saving Behavior

Gerber and Huber (2009, 2010) began a literature in political science studying whether local economic activity is affected differently by elections in localities with different political affiliations.
These papers and the subsequent literature has primarily focused on consumption spending (McGrath, 2017; Benhabib and Spiegel, 2019; Gillitzer and Prasad, 2018; Mian et al., forthcoming).
While there is disagreement across the papers, the balance of this evidence suggests little to no
differential effect of the election on local consumption levels across areas with different dominant
political affiliations. This finding is striking in part because one would expect differential real effects of the election outcome through policy on the current, and future economic circumstances
of people with different political affiliations. In contrast to this literature, we measure individuallevel behavior controlling for the real effects on the local economy and labor income.
In this section, we investigate saving using three measures of inflows into accounts. We show
that there is some weak evidence that the typical Republican retirement investor increased their
savings in investment accounts by a small amount following the election, relative to their Democratic counterparts.
First, we investigate a measure that exists for all RIs in our sample, the net flow rate, defined

25

as net account inflows less account outflows as a share of total initial balance:
Net Flow Ratei,t =

Depositsi,t

Withdrawalsi,t

Financial Wealthi,0

.

(5)

Figure 12 shows the average of this saving rate by zip code bin at a monthly frequency and reveals no noticeable differences by likely party affiliation. We also run a regression similar to that
in Section V, but using the year-on-year change in annual net flow rate as the dependent variable.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 show that Republican households, who become more optimistic,
increase their saving rate relative to Democratic households following the election. Including
employer–county–period fixed effects has a big impact on the estimates – the pre-election trend
disappears and the overall effects are smaller.
Second, at some loss of sample size, we can instead measure a saving rate more directly by
defining the net saving rate as net inflows divided by income:
Net Saving Ratei,t =

Depositsi,t

Withdrawalsi,t

Incomei,t

.

(6)

This has the obvious advantage of being a more standard measure of the saving rate but limits our
sample to RIs for which we observe annual income for the head of the household. Columns (3)
and (4) of Table 7 again show evidence that Republican households save more relative to Democratic households following the election, with no pre-election differences once we control for employer by county by year fixed effects. The effect on political affiliation is economically small but
not trivial, on the order of three quarters of a percent of income. Columns (5) and (6) of Table 7
show similar results when we limit financial flows to accounts owned by the head of the household
for whom income is measured.
A disadvantage of these first two measures of saving rates is that they have a lot of variation
over time and across people because of large withdrawals and large inflows, presumably both significantly due to transfers out of and into the financial institution rather than due to actual saving.
To address this issue, we measure the retirement saving rate as the contribution rate (as a percentage of income) chosen by the head of the household in his or her active retirement account. The
advantage of this measure is that it avoids account inflows and outflows that represent transfers
from and to other institutions. This measure still does not avoid the possibility of substitution
between retirement saving and non-retirement. Columns (7) and (8) of Table 7 show that in the
year prior to the election, the contribution rates of Democratic investors rose faster. Most of this
difference can be explained by employer effects. There is no statistically significant difference in
contribution rate changes post election by party affiliation. The effects are also economically small,
on the order of 0.05 percent of income.

26

We take this evidence as suggestive of only very small effects of the election on households’
saving rates. If this were also true of consumption spending, this would have two implications.
First, and less important given our extensive controls, a non-response of consumption further mitigates the concern that differences in the economic effects of the policy changes cause the differences in portfolio responses that we find. Second, only certain utility functions are consistent with
differences in beliefs that cause differences in portfolio exposures to risk without causing differences in consumption changes. Specifically, these findings are consistent with a unit elasticity of
intertemporal substitution.
The Michigan SCC data also supports this interpretation. As we showed in Figures 2a and 2b,
in contrast to the large changes in beliefs about the future of the US economy, households report
only small changes in their expectations about their own personal economic situations. Here we
show some evidence that Republicans and Democrats do not report changing their views about
whether it is a good time to consume.
Also consistent with this finding, the SCC shows only small differential changes in responses
to the questions: “Generally speaking, do you think now is a good or a bad time for people to buy
major household items / a house?” (see Appendix Figures A.15a and A.15b). Consistent with the
strong economy, most people believe it is a good time to buy a house or major durable item before
the election, with Democrats being slightly more optimistic than Republicans only for the purchase
of a durable item. This difference goes away after the election, with beliefs about the purchase of a
durable item similar by party affiliation. For the purchase of a house, Republicans and Democrats
hold similar views prior to the election and Republicans become slightly more optimistic following
the election.

IX.B

Differences in the Composition of Equity Holdings

The quantitative analysis so far has concentrated on the equity share as a summary measure of investor portfolios. Figure 8b shows that the market beta of price-constant portfolios of Republicans
also rises relative to Democrats after the election. Consistent with these raw effects, columns (1)–
(3) of Table 8 find that likely Republicans increase the market beta of their portfolios relative to
likely Democrats in the post-election year under the full set of controls. Next, we turn to a more
detailed decomposition of investor portfolios. We find that differential portfolio reallocation after
the election is concentrated on rebalancing across asset classes.
First, to what extent are differences in the portfolio market beta of people with different political affiliations due to differences in the market beta of the equity portfolio? Figure 13a shows
both minimal differences in the market beta of equity by party affiliation and only small relative
changes in the beta of equity following the election. Columns (4)–(6) of Table 8 quantify these differences. Within equity we do not see an increase in the market exposure of Republicans relative
27

to Democrats, controlling for ex-ante differences. This finding is consistent with our focus on the
rise in the equity share of Republicans relative to Democrats in our main set of results.
Second, do we see differences in the post-election reallocation across sectors? Stock market performance differs substantially across stocks and sectors expected to benefit from the unexpected
change in party control (Wagner et al., 2018). We have seen that there are differences in the exante composition of household equity holdings; controlling for this heterogeneity does not alter
our main results. In addition, we find no evidence of hetereneous reallocation after the election.
Columns (7)-(10) of Table 8 show insignificant coefficients for changes in the winning and losing
sectors share of equity on the Republican contribution share. These results suggests that investors
of different political affiliations do not disagree on the extent to which the election differentially
impact the different sectors of the economy, and are inconsistent with alternative explanations of
our main finding that equity share changes differ by party affiliation through differences in information or tastes. If Republicans are better able to identify firms or sectors that do well after the
election or have more taste for holding those types of assets, we should observe significant differential changes in the composition of equity portfolios following the election. We do not observe
such changes (see also the plots in Appendix Figure A.16.)
Third, do differences in beliefs about the future state of the US economy translate into differential shifts into and out of international equity investments? We find no evidence of differential
changes in international equity allocations.38 Figure 13b shows the share of international equity
across households sorted into quintiles by party affiliation of their zip code, relative to the end
of October 2016. Prior to the election there is a small relative decrease in the international share
held by the most Democratic zip codes and there is a similar small relative decrease following the
election. Columns (11) and (12) of Table 8 show that in the regression analysis with full controls,
there are no significant differential changes in the international equity share of Republican areas
relative to Democratic areas.

IX.C

The Impact of Different Changes in Beliefs on Asset Demand

The public signal of the election changed beliefs and caused trade and portfolio allocation across
households. Did this change in disagreement change the net demand for equity of the retirement
investor sample that we observe? Did the heterogeneous changes in beliefs and the resulting trade
contribute to the high returns on the stock market following the election?
We can provide only a very rough answer to these questions. We begin by defining the baseline
relative to which we measure the effect of differences in the updating of beliefs. We assume that
there would have been no change in the demand for equity from the election had the Democratic
38 Individual equity is classified as international if it is traded on an international exchange or if the company is
incorporated outside the US. Equity funds are classified as domestic or international based on their product description.

28

candidate won the election, that is, had the much more likely outcome occurred. Further, we base
our calculation on our regressions using county vote share as the measure of political affiliation
(see Appendix Table A.5) and assume there was no net change in the demand for equity in a
county in which investable wealth is evenly split between Democrats and Republicans. Finally,
we assume that wealth is uncorrelated with party affiliation within counties.
Under these three significant assumptions, the change in net demand for equity from each
county is our regression coefficient times county wealth times the difference between county vote
share and 0.5. Summing across counties leads to a decrease of $660 million in the demand for
equity by the investors that we observe over the year following the election.
What about the aggregate demand for equity? We only observe a fraction of the retirement
investors and wealth in each county. To scale our estimate to a measure for all retirement investors,
we scale up the demand in each county by multiplying by the share of the population that we
observe in that county (based on US Census data) times the national share of households that are
retirement investors (from the 2016 SCF). Again, summing across counties, this crude estimate
implies that the demand for equity declined by $1.09 billion among retirement investors in the US.
Finally, while we do not know much about the political affiliations of very wealthy households,
if we simply scale this number up by the inverse of the share of the investable wealth in the US
held by retirement investors in the 2016 SCF, this back-of-the-envelope calculation implies that
the election causes a decrease in the net demand for equity of $4.37 billion in the year following
the election. This is obviously a very rough estimate, but far too small a number to have had a
noticeable effect on returns during the year following the election.

X

Concluding Discussion

We study the unexpected outcome of the 2016 US election as a public signal that is widely-observed,
well-measured, and for which we have ex ante measures of how different investors should interpret this signal given their identities, or models that they use to interpret the world. We find that
people with different political affiliations update their beliefs and rebalance their portfolios differentially in response to a common public signal. A correlation between differences in beliefs and
differences in behavior may not be causal, and an important contribution of our analysis comes
from our controls for an extensive array of other factors that affect rebalancing differentially such
as through the real effects of changes in economic policies on incomes or local risk exposures. Consistent with dynamic models of heterogeneous beliefs, we show that the heterogeneity in updating
across households leads to an increase in trading volume.
Reported beliefs data also suggest that Democrats indeed became more pessimistic about the
US economy following the election and that Republicans became more optimistic. In contrast, peo29

ple do not report the same polarized expectations about their own personal situations. Relatedly,
our retirement savings data also do not show differences in saving rates across households with
different affiliations.
Finally, while we find small average differences in rebalancing between Democrats and Republicans following the election, these small averages are driven by very large rebalancing by a small
share of investors. Across both investors and accounts, the trading responses we find are consistent with the inertia generally found for typical American retirement investors. We also find that
differences in rebalancing persist over many months after the election, which is consistent with
investors being aware that there is disagreement and that prices do not rapidly incorporate their
own views.

30

References
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton, “Economics and Identity,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2000, 115 (3), 715–753.
Alesina, Alberto, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso, “Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 521–54.
Ameriks, John, Gábor Kézdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D. Shapiro, “Heterogeneity in Expectations, Risk Tolerance, and Household Stock Shares: The Attenuation Puzzle,” Journal of Business
& Economic Statistics, 2020, 38 (3), 633–646.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi, “Importing Political Polarization?
The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure,” American Economic Review, 2020, 110
(10), 3139–83.
Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, “The Economic Effects of
Social Networks: Evidence From the Housing Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126
(6), 2224–2276.
Bamber, Linda Smith, Orie E. Barron, and Thomas L. Stober, “Differential Interpretations and Trading Volume,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 1999, 34 (3), 369–386.
Banerjee, Snehal and Ilan Kremer, “Disagreement and Learning: Dynamic Patterns of Trade,” Journal of Finance, 2010, 65 (4), 1269–1302.
Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Review of Financial Studies, 2008,
21 (2), 785–818.
Barrot, Jean-Noël, Erik Loualiche, and Julien Sauvagnat, “The Globalization Risk Premium,” Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (5), 2391–2439.
Bartels, Larry M., “Beyond the Running Tally: Partisan Bias in Political Perceptions,” Political
Behavior, 2002, 24 (2), 117–150.
Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, “Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 805–855.
Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel, “Sentiments and Economic Activity: Evidence from US
States,” The Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (618), 715–733.

31

Bonaparte, Yosef, Alok Kumar, and Jeremy K. Page, “Political Climate, Optimism, and Investment
Decisions,” Journal of Financial Markets, 2017, 34, 69–94.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Emmanuel Farhi, Ralph S J Koijen, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Sydney C Ludvigson, Hanno Lustig, Stefan Nagel, and Monika Piazzesi, “Review Article: Perspectives on the
Future of Asset Pricing,” The Review of Financial Studies, April 2021, 34 (4), 2126—-2160.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Jonathan A. Parker, “Optimal Expectations,” American Economic
Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1092–1118.
Bullock, John G., Alan S. Gerber, Seth J. Hill, and Gregory A. Huber, “Partisan Bias in Factual
Beliefs about Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 2015, 10 (4), 519–578.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, “Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare
Costs of Household Investment Mistakes,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (5), 707–747.
Carlin, Bruce I., Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba, “Disagreement and Asset Prices,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 2014, 114 (2), 226–238.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong, “Wall Street and the Housing Bubble,” American
Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2797–2829.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “For Better or For Worse:
Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior,” in David A. Wise, ed., Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press, 2004, pp. 81–121.
Conover, Pamela Johnston, Stanley Feldman, and Kathleen Knight, “The Personal and Political
Underpinnings of Economic Forecasts,” American Journal of Political Science, 1987, 31 (3), 559–
583.
Cookson, J. Anthony and Marina Niessner, “Why Don’t We Agree? Evidence from a Social Network of Investors,” Journal of Finance, 2020, 75 (1), 173–228.
Curcuru, Stephanie, John Heaton, Deborah Lucas, and Damien Moore, “Heterogeneity and Portfolio Choice: Theory and Evidence,” in “Handbook of Financial Econometrics: Tools and Techniques” 2010, pp. 337–382.
Curtin, Richard, “Economic Policy Preferences,” Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan,
September, http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/files/econpoly1608.pdf 2016.
, “Presidential Honeymoons,” Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan, January,
http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/files/honeym1701.pdf 2017.
32

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, “Optimal Consumption and Investment with Capital Gains Taxes,” Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 14 (3), 583–616.
Das, Sreyoshi, Camelia M Kuhnen, and Stefan Nagel, “Socioeconomic Status and Macroeconomic
Expectations,” Review of Financial Studies, 2020, 33 (1), 395–432.
Edmans, Alex, Diego Garcı́a, and Øyvind Norli, “Sports Sentiment and Stock Returns,” Journal of
Finance, 2007, 62 (4), 1967–1998.
Feenstra, Robert C., “U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances,” NBER Working Paper No.
5515 1996.
Gaines, Brian J., James H. Kuklinski, Paul J. Quirk, Buddy Peyton, and Jay Verkuilen, “Same Facts,
Different Interpretations: Partisan Motivation and Opinion on Iraq,” Journal of Politics, 2007, 69
(4), 957–974.
Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer, “What Comes to Mind,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1399–1433.
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Media Bias and Reputation,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (2), 280–316.
Gerber, Alan S. and Gregory A. Huber, “Partisanship and Economic Behavior: Do Partisan Differences in Economic Forecasts Predict Real Economic Behavior?,” American Political Science
Review, 2009, 103 (3), 407–426.
and

, “Partisanship, Political Control, and Economic Assessments,” American Journal of Po-

litical Science, 2010, 54 (1), 153–173.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Stephen Utkus, “Five Facts about Beliefs
and Portfolios,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Gillitzer, Christian and Nalini Prasad, “The Effect of Consumer Sentiment on Consumption: CrossSectional Evidence From Elections,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2018, 10 (4),
234–69.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, “The Investment Behavior and Performance of Various Investor Types: A Study of Finland’s Unique Data Set,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2000, 55
(1), 43–67.
Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli, Household Portfolios, MIT Press, 2002.

33

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent, “Fragile Beliefs and the Price of Uncertainty,” Quantitative Economics, 2010, 1 (1), 129–162.
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, “Differences of Opinion Make a Horse Race,” Review of Financial
Studies, 1993, 6 (3), 473–506.
Harrison, J. Michael and David M. Kreps, “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
Heterogeneous Expectations,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1978, 92 (2), 323–336.
Hirshleifer, David and Tyler Shumway, “Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the Weather,”
Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (3), 1009–1032.
Hong, Harrison and Jeremy C. Stein, “Disagreement and the Stock Market,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2007, 21 (2), 109–128.
and Leonard Kostovetsky, “Red and blue investing: Values and finance,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2012, 103 (1), 1–19.
Huberman, Gur, Tobias Konitzer, Masha Krupenkin, David Rothschild, and Shawndra Hill, “Economic Expectations, Voting, and Economic Decisions around Elections,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2018, 108, 597–602.
Kamstra, Mark J., Lisa A. Kramer, and Maurice D. Levi, “Winter Blues: A SAD Stock Market
Cycle,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 324–343.
Kandel, Eugene and Neil D. Pearson, “Differential Interpretation of Public Signals and Trade in
Speculative Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (4), 831–872.
Kaustia, Markku and Sami Torstila, “Stock market aversion? Political preferences and stock market
participation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 100 (1), 98–112.
Kempf, Elisabeth and Margarita Tsoutsoura, “Partisan Professionals: Evidence from Credit Rating
Analysts,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Li, Dan and Geng Li, “Whose Disagreement Matters? Household Belief Dispersion and Stock
Trading Volume,” Review of Finance, 2021.
Linnainmaa, Juhani T., Brian Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero, “The Misguided Beliefs of Financial Advisors,” Journal of Finance, 2021, 76 (2), 587–621.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
and Savings Behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–1187.

34

Mailath, George J. and Larry Samuelson, “Learning under Diverse World Views: Model-Based
Inference,” American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (5), 1464–1501.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect
Risk Taking?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 373–416.
Manski, Charles F., “Survey Measurement of Probabilistic Macroeconomic Expectations: Progress
and Promise,” in Jonathan A. Parker and Martin S. Eichenbaum, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2017, Volume 32, 2018, pp. 411–471.
Martin, Gregory J. and Ali Yurukoglu, “Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2565–99.
McGrath, Mary C., “Economic Behavior and the Partisan Perceptual Screen,” Quarterly Journal of
Political Science, 2017, 11 (4), 363–83.
Merton, Robert C., “Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time Case,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1969, 51 (3), 247–257.
Mian, Atif R., Amir Sufi, and Nasim Khoshkhou, “Partisan Bias, Economic Expectations, and
Household Spending,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Miller, Edward M., “Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion,” Journal of Finance, 1977, 32
(4), 1151–1168.
Morris, Stephen, “Speculative Investor Behavior and Learning,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (4), 1111–1133.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer, “The Market for News,” American Economic Review,
2005, 95 (4), 1031–1053.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, “Inequality Aversion, Populism, and the Backlash against Globalization,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Prior, Markus, “Is Partisan Bias in Perceptions of Objective Conditions Real? The Effect of an
Accuracy Incentive on the Stated Beliefs of Partisans,” Presented at the Annual Conference of
the Midwest Political Science Association, Chicago 2007.
, Gaurav Sood, and Kabir Khanna, “You Cannot be Serious: The Impact of Accuracy Incentives
on Partisan Bias in Reports of Economic Perceptions,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science,
2015, 10 (4), 489–518.

35

Scheinkman, Jose’ A. and Wei Xiong, “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,” Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (6), 1183–1220.
Simsek, Alp, “Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (1), 1–53.
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does “Irrationality” Disappear
with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff,
eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 18, 2003, pp. 139–194.
Wagner, Alexander F., Richard J. Zeckhauser, and Alexandre Ziegler, “Unequal Rewards to Firms:
Stock Market Responses to the Trump Election and the 2017 Corporate Tax Reform,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2018, 108, 590–596.

36

Figure 1: Survey Expectations on Future State of the Economy
(a) Expected Business Conditions in 5 Years

Business Condition Level

5

4

3

2

1
2016-04

2016-07

2016-10

2017-01

2017-04

2017-07

Party
Democrat

Weak Democrat

Independent

Weak Republican

Republican

(b) Expectations on Unemployment

More

Same

Less
2016-04

2016-07

2016-10

2017-01

2017-04

2017-07

Party Affiliation
Democrat

Weak Democrat

Independent

Weak Republican

Republican

Notes: These graphs plot survey expectations on the future state of the economy by political affiliation. The data is from
the University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Confidence (SCC). The upper panel shows the average response to the
question “Looking ahead, which would you say is more likely – that in the country as a whole we’ll have continuous
good times during the next 5 years or so, or that we will have periods of widespread unemployment or depression, or
what?” Responses range from 1 (worst) to 5 (best). The lower panel shows expectations on unemployment in a year
relative to the current unemployment rate.

37

Figure 2: Survey Expectations on Own Economic Circumstances Versus Overall Conditions
(a) Expected Own Income in 1 Year

Higher

Same

Lower
2016-04

2016-07

2016-10

2017-01

2017-04

2017-07

Party Affiliation
Democrat

Weak Democrat

Independent

Weak Republican

Republican

(b) Expected Business Conditions in 1 Year

Better

Same

Worse
2016-04

2016-07

2016-10

2017-01

2017-04

2017-07

Party Affiliation
Democrat

Weak Democrat

Independent

Weak Republican

Republican

Notes: These graphs plot survey expectations on the future state of own economic circumstances and the overall economy by political affiliation. The data is from the University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Confidence (SCC). The
upper panel shows the average response to the question “During the next 12 months, do you expect your income to
be higher or lower than during the past year?” The lower panel shows expectations on whether business conditions
overall will be better or worse in a year.

38

Figure 3: SCF Wealth Distribution in Population and RI Subsample
0.25

Density

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
100

1K

10K

100K

1M

10M

Investable Wealth in Dollars
SCF All

SCF Retirement Investors

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of investable wealth (conditional on positive) in the full population and in the
subsample of retirement investors (RIs) in the public version of the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Investable
wealth is defined as the sum of money market funds, stocks, bonds, pooled investment funds, retirement accounts, and
other managed assets. To construct the RI subsample, we select households with age of the head between 25 and
64 and with quasi-liquid retirement wealth, and run quantile regressions of log retirement wealth on a second-order
polynomial in age. We use the fitted 10th and 90th percentiles by age as retirement wealth cutoffs.

39

Figure 4: Wealth Distribution in Comparison to SCF
(a) Retirement Wealth

Density

0.2

0.1

0.0
100

1K

10K

100K

1M

10M

Retirement Wealth in Dollars
Sample

SCF Retirement Investors

(b) Total Investable Wealth

Density

0.2

0.1

0.0
100

1K

10K

100K

1M

10M

Investable Wealth in Dollars
Sample

SCF Retirement Investors

Notes: These figures plot the distributions of retirement wealth and total investable wealth, respectively, in our sample
compared to the equivalent sample of RIs in the public version of the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). We
select households with positive quasi-liquid retirement wealth and run quantile regressions of log retirement wealth
on a second-order polynomial in age for households in the 2016 SCF. We use the fitted 10th and 90th percentiles by age
as retirement wealth cutoffs in both datasets. We include households with age of the head between 25 and 64 and filter
our sample on households that have portfolio holdings between 20% and 500% of initial assets in every month in the
sample.

40

Figure 5: Household Coverage in Sample
(a) Map of Household Coverage in Sample (Scrambled)

Share of Population
Less than 1%
1% to 2.5%
2.5% to 5%
5% to 10%
10% to 20%
More than 20%

(b) Distribution of Household Coverage by County

Density

15

10

5

Above 20%

0
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

County Share of Population

Notes: Panel (a) shows the geographical distribution of household coverage in our sample of RIs relative to the population total number of households by county from the 2011–2015 American Community Survey. We calculate the share
for every county in the US and then randomly reallocate the shares across counties in each state for confidentiality reasons. Panel (b) plots the density of household coverage by county in our sample of RIs as a fraction of the population
total number of households by county.

41

Figure 6: Portfolio Equity Share by Zip Code Party Affiliation

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(a) Equity Share, Equally Weighted Across Households

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%
2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(b) Equity Share, Value Weighted Across Households

3%

2%

1%

0%
2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01

2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: These graphs plot the average equity share of household portfolio assets in five groups by zip code party affiliation measured from political contributions, relative to the share by the end of October 2016. The sample is our full set
of RI households. Average shares by group are equally weighted and asset weighted across households, respectively.

42

Figure 7: Portfolio Allocations for Previously Active Sample

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(a) Equity Share for Previously Active Sample

4%

3%

2%

1%

0%
2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01

2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Market Beta (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(b) Market Beta for Previously Active Sample

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01

2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: This figure plots the average equity share and market beta, respectively, of household portfolio assets in five
groups by zip code party affiliation measured from political contributions, relative to the share by the end of October
2016. The sample is the subset of RI households with an active portfolio reallocation in the prior year (11.1% of all RIs).
Average allocations by group are equally weighted across households.

43

Figure 8: Active Portfolio Rebalancing by Zip Code Political Affiliation

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(a) Equity Share of Price-Constant Portfolios

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Market Beta (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(b) Market Beta of Price-Constant Portfolios

0.010

0.005

0.000

⌧0.005
2015⌧10

2016⌧01 2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: In this figure, we plot the average equity share and average portfolio market beta, respectively, of hypothetical
price-constant household portfolios in five groups by zip code party affiliation measured from political contributions,
relative to the share by the end of October 2016. The portfolio measures are calculated for a hypothetical portfolio
that is insensitive to passive appreciations. To construct these price-constant portfolios, we start with initial household
holdings as of October 2015, assume there are no price changes, and keep track of cumulative monthly dollar inflows
and outflows at the asset level. For each month we then calculate the equity share from this hypothetical portfolio. The
sample is our full set of RI households. Average allocations by group are equally weighted across households.

44

Figure 9: Panel Regression Coefficients of Equity Shares on Likely Political Affiliation
(b) Price-Constant Equity Share (Baseline Controls)

(a) Equity Share (Baseline Controls)
0.8%

0.6%

0.4%

●

●

Coefficient on Zip Code RCS

Coefficient on Zip Code RCS

●
●

●

0.2%
●

0.0%

●

●

0.75%

●
●

0.50%
●

0.25%
●

●
●

●

0.00%

2016⌧01 2016⌧04 2016⌧07 2016⌧10 2017⌧01 2017⌧04 2017⌧07 2017⌧10

●

2016⌧01 2016⌧04 2016⌧07 2016⌧10 2017⌧01 2017⌧04 2017⌧07 2017⌧10

Month

Month

(d) Price-Constant Equity Share (Employer–
County–Period FE)

(c) Equity Share (Employer–County–Period FE)

Coefficient on Zip Code RCS

Coefficient on Zip Code RCS

0.8%
●

0.6%
●
●

0.4%
●

0.2% ●

●
●

0.0%

●

0.6%

●
●

0.4%
●

0.2%

●
●
●

●

0.0%

2016⌧01 2016⌧04 2016⌧07 2016⌧10 2017⌧01 2017⌧04 2017⌧07 2017⌧10

●

2016⌧01 2016⌧04 2016⌧07 2016⌧10 2017⌧01 2017⌧04 2017⌧07 2017⌧10

Month

Month

Notes: This figure plots the estimated regression coefficients of quarterly household portfolio equity shares on the
zip code Republican contribution share, for the three quarters prior to the election and the four quarters following the
election, relative to allocations just before the election. In panels (a) and (c) we report the results for the observed equity
share, and in panels (b) and (d) we report the results for the equity share of hypothetical price-constant portfolios that
are insensitive to passive appreciations and are driven by trading only. The baseline controls are the initial equity
share, age, gender, marital status, log initial financial wealth, log labor income in 2015, the initial winning and losing
sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth (2010–2015), all interacted by quarterly indicators, as well as
individual fixed effects. In panels (c) and (d) we additionally control for employer ⇥ county ⇥ quarter fixed effects.
The sample is our full set of RI households between October 2015 and October 2017, for which we observe the complete
set of controls (27.7% of all RIs). Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.

45

Figure 10: Equity Share of Price-Constant Portfolios by Zip Code Party Affiliation, Small Versus
Large Changes

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(a) Restricting to Cumulative Changes of at Least 10%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(b) Restricting to Cumulative Changes of at Most 10%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: These graphs plot the average equity share of hypothetical price-constant household portfolios in five groups by
zip code party affiliation measured from political contributions, relative to the share by the end of October 2016. The
price-constant equity share is calculated for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is
driven by trading only. In panel (a), we only include cumulative changes relative to October 2016 of at least 10%, and
set portfolio changes to zero otherwise. In panel (b), we only include cumulative changes of at most 10%. The sample
is our full set of RI households. Average shares by group are equally weighted across households.

46

Figure 11: Trading Volume Relative to Initial Balance
(a) All and Active Trading Volume for Aggregate Sample

3.0%

Share in %

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%
2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01

2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month
All trades

Active trades

(b) Trading Volume by Zip Code Political Affiliation

Share in %

3.0%

2.7%

2.4%

2.1%

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01

2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: This figure plots average trading volume as a fraction of initial balance, where volume is defined as one half
times the sum of the absolute values of buy and sell transactions. The upper panel plots the volume of all trades and
of active (investor-initiated) trades or exchanges. The lower panel plots the volume of all trades in five groups by zip
code party affiliation measured from political contributions. The sample is our full set of RI households. Averages are
equally weighted across households.

47

Flow (% of Initial Assets) Relative to October 2016

Figure 12: Household Net Flow Rates by Zip Code Party Affiliation

0.8%

0.6%

0.4%

0.2%

0.0%

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01

2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: This graph plots average net flows as a fraction of initial financial wealth in five groups by zip code party
affiliation measured from political contributions, relative to the savings rate in October 2016. Net flows are defined as
total deposits minus withdrawals. The sample is our full set of RI households. Average flow rates by group are equally
weighted across households.

48

Figure 13: Equity Composition of Price-Constant Portfolios by Zip Code Party Affiliation

Market Beta (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(a) Market Beta of Equity by Zip Code Party Affiliation

0.004

0.002

0.000

2015⌧10

2016⌧01 2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Share in % (Relative to October 31, 2016)

(b) International Share of Equity by Zip Code Party Affiliation

0.4%

0.2%

0.0%

2015⌧10

2016⌧01

2016⌧04

2016⌧07

2016⌧10

2017⌧01 2017⌧04

2017⌧07

2017⌧10

Month

[0,0.35)

Zip Code Republican Contribution Share
[0.35,0.45)
[0.45,0.55)
[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

Notes: These graphs plot the average price-constant market beta of household equity assets and the average priceconstant international share of household equity products, respectively, in five groups by zip code party affiliation
measured from political contributions, relative to the share by the end of October 2016. The price-constant portfolio
measures are calculated for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is driven by trading
only. Market betas are obtained by regressing monthly fund or security excess returns on the value-weighted CRSP
market excess return over the period 2006–2019 with at least 24 observations. International equity holdings consist of
individual foreign company stocks and funds that invest in international equity. The sample is our full set of households. Averages by group are equally weighted across households.

49

Table 1: Summary Statistics on Portfolios of Retirement Investors Sample
Republican contribution share
All
Share of sample

SCF

100.0%

[0,0.35)

[0.35,0.45)

[0.45,0.55)

[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

44.8%

18.0%

14.8%

12.5%

9.9%

Average wealth (in 1,000 USD)
Total investable wealth
Retirement wealth

138.1
116.4

232.8
122.5

147.9
118.2

138.3
119.3

136.4
118.6

140.1
121.1

128.7
114.5

Median wealth (in 1,000 USD)
Total investable wealth
Retirement wealth

56.7
53.7

66.0
51.0

58.2
54.1

58.1
55.1

57.7
55.1

59.5
56.8

55.0
53.0

Average allocation
Equity share
Bond share
Cash share
Market beta

71.2%
19.5%
8.6%
0.743

53.0%
44.5%
2.5%

71.5%
18.2%
9.5%
0.746

71.2%
19.6%
8.5%
0.743

71.1%
20.0%
8.3%
0.743

71.1%
20.0%
8.2%
0.744

70.7%
20.8%
7.8%
0.741

Average allocation (weighted)
Equity share
Bond share
Cash share
Market beta

68.6%
20.6%
9.7%
0.717

59.8%
36.8%
3.4%

69.0%
19.1%
10.7%
0.721

68.8%
20.8%
9.3%
0.718

68.5%
21.3%
9.1%
0.715

68.2%
21.3%
9.5%
0.713

67.7%
22.5%
8.8%
0.709

Average allocation of equity
Market beta
Fund share
Winning sectors share
Losing sectors share
International share

1.007
90.3%
5.4%
4.2%
6.9%

1.007
90.5%
4.8%
4.7%
6.9%

1.006
90.3%
5.4%
4.3%
7.2%

1.006
90.3%
5.6%
4.1%
7.0%

1.008
89.7%
6.1%
4.0%
7.1%

1.011
89.7%
6.5%
3.5%
6.9%

Notes: This table presents summary statistics on wealth and portfolio allocations of our retirement investors (RI) sample as of October 31, 2016, for the full sample and for five groups by zip code party affiliation measured from political
contributions. We select households with quasi-liquid retirement wealth and run quantile regressions of log retirement
wealth on a second-order polynomial in age for households in the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). We use the
fitted 10th and 90th percentiles by age as retirement wealth cutoffs at the initial date. We include households with age
of the head between 25 and 64 years and create a balanced panel by filtering on households that have portfolio holdings
between 20% and 500% of initial assets over the sample period from October 31, 2015 to October 31, 2017. All funds and
individual securities are characterized as equity, bonds, cash or cash-like assets, or alternative assets. Mixed funds are
subdivided into equity and bonds based on their asset holdings. Market betas are obtained by regressing monthly fund
or security excess returns on the value-weighted CRSP market excess return over the period 2006–2019 with at least 24
observations. Winning (losing) sectors are sectors that did relatively well (poorly) between the election and the end of
2016. International equity holdings consist of individual foreign company stocks and funds that invest in international
equity.

50

Table 2: Summary Statistics on Demographics of Retirement Investors Sample
Republican contribution share
All

SCF

[0,0.35)

[0.35,0.45)

[0.45,0.55)

[0.55,0.65)

[0.65,1]

94.8%
85.7%
19.0%
63.3%
45.6%
39.7%
11.7%

95.1%
87.3%
16.8%
67.0%
50.8%
45.2%
11.1%

95.0%
87.8%
16.0%
68.0%
51.5%
45.9%
11.1%

95.1%
87.9%
16.6%
68.1%
52.6%
47.1%
11.4%

94.7%
88.7%
14.7%
70.1%
55.1%
49.3%
10.7%

Percentage of sample
with observed
Gender
Marital status
Non-retirement assets
Employer industry
Labor income in 2015
Income growth over 2016-17
Active change in prior year

94.8%
87.0%
16.8%
66.6%
49.9%
44.2%
11.1%

Average age (in years)
% Female
% Married

46.0
43.8%
73.1%

46.3
19.9%
69.5%

45.2
46.5%
69.3%

46.3
44.6%
73.9%

46.6
43.2%
75.3%

46.7
41.2%
77.0%

46.8
38.0%
78.1%

Labor income in 2016
(in 1,000 USD)
Average
Median
10th percentile
90th percentile

101.2
77.3
37.2
172.4

102.8
81.0
33.4
182.3

115.7
84.0
38.3
200.3

99.1
77.9
37.6
169.1

96.1
76.3
37.2
162.1

98.6
78.0
38.0
166.3

91.6
74.6
37.3
152.2

Notes: This table presents summary statistics on demographics and composition of our retirement investors (RI) sample as of October 31, 2016, for the full sample and for five groups by zip code party affiliation measured from political
contributions. We select households with quasi-liquid retirement wealth and run quantile regressions of log retirement
wealth on a second-order polynomial in age for households in the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). We use the
fitted 10th and 90th percentiles by age as retirement wealth cutoffs at the initial date. We include households with age
of the head between 25 and 64 years and create a balanced panel by filtering on households that have portfolio holdings
between 20% and 500% of initial assets over the sample period from October 31, 2015 to October 31, 2017.

51

Table 3: Regressions of Price-Constant Equity Share Changes on Likely Political Affiliation
One-year difference in price-constant equity share (in %), all households
Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share ⇥ Post

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.343
(0.042)
1.071
(0.066)

-0.225
(0.039)
1.061
(0.057)

-0.232
(0.039)
1.062
(0.057)

-0.097
(0.037)
0.932
(0.056)

-0.070
(0.038)
0.900
(0.059)

-0.148
(0.043)
0.929
(0.064)

-0.221
(0.054)
0.969
(0.084)

-0.160
(0.059)
0.859
(0.091)

-10.273
(0.060)
-3.888
(0.077)
-0.104
(0.001)
-0.021
(0.001)
0.299
(0.012)
-0.509
(0.019)
0.037
(0.014)
0.120
(0.021)
-0.233
(0.007)
0.245
(0.011)
0.045
(0.013)
0.282
(0.021)

-10.273
(0.060)
-3.890
(0.077)
-0.104
(0.001)
-0.020
(0.001)
0.301
(0.012)
-0.502
(0.019)
0.037
(0.014)
0.121
(0.021)
-0.234
(0.007)
0.243
(0.011)
0.044
(0.013)
0.286
(0.021)

-10.392
(0.060)
-3.856
(0.077)
-0.104
(0.001)
-0.021
(0.001)
0.166
(0.013)
-0.415
(0.021)
0.047
(0.014)
0.096
(0.021)
-0.224
(0.007)
0.236
(0.011)
0.062
(0.014)
0.261
(0.022)

-10.798
(0.062)
-3.815
(0.079)
-0.106
(0.001)
-0.023
(0.001)
0.140
(0.013)
-0.394
(0.021)
0.051
(0.014)
0.092
(0.022)
-0.215
(0.007)
0.227
(0.011)
0.087
(0.015)
0.227
(0.024)

-10.291
(0.060)
-3.880
(0.077)
-0.104
(0.001)
-0.022
(0.001)
0.284
(0.012)
-0.495
(0.019)
0.044
(0.014)
0.107
(0.021)
-0.234
(0.007)
0.247
(0.011)
0.049
(0.013)
0.284
(0.021)

-10.342
(0.060)
-3.870
(0.077)
-0.104
(0.001)
-0.021
(0.001)
0.271
(0.012)
-0.487
(0.019)
0.043
(0.014)
0.101
(0.021)
-0.230
(0.007)
0.240
(0.011)
0.058
(0.013)
0.273
(0.021)

-10.805
(0.068)
-3.799
(0.085)
-0.105
(0.001)
-0.024
(0.001)
0.144
(0.015)
-0.378
(0.024)
0.048
(0.016)
0.092
(0.025)
-0.211
(0.008)
0.228
(0.012)
0.085
(0.017)
0.193
(0.027)

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Lagged equity share
Lagged equity share ⇥ Post
Age
Age ⇥ Post
Female
Female ⇥ Post
Married
Married ⇥ Post
Log wealth
Log wealth ⇥ Post
Log labor income 2015
Log labor income 2015 ⇥ Post
Controls by year
Baseline
Labor income growth 2016-17
Zip code house price growth 2015-17
Employer industry
Employer
State
County
Employer ⇥ County
R2

0.001

0.067

0.067

Y

0.068

Y

0.080

Y

0.067

Y
0.068

Y
0.189

Notes: This table presents regression coefficients of annual changes in price-constant household portfolio equity shares on the zip code
Republican contribution share, before and after the election, for various sets of controls. The price-constant equity share is calculated
for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is driven by trading only. The baseline controls are the
lagged equity share, age, gender, marital status, log lagged financial wealth, log labor income in 2015, the lagged winning and losing sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth (2010–2015), interacted by annual indicators. In specifications (3)–(8) we
consider additional sets of controls (interacted by yearly dummies) that include ex post income growth (2016–2017) and house price
growth (2015–2017), employer industry indicators (3-digit NAICS), employer indicators, state indicators, county indicators, and employer ⇥ county indicators. The sample is our full set of RI households between October 2015 and October 2017, for which we observe
the complete set of controls (27.7% of all RIs). Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.

52

Table 4: Regressions of Price-Constant Equity Share Changes on Likely Political Affiliation for
Active Investors
One-year difference in price-constant equity share (in %), active households
Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share ⇥ Post

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.172
(0.220)
3.574
(0.358)

-0.581
(0.218)
3.113
(0.314)

-0.559
(0.218)
3.139
(0.315)

-0.148
(0.212)
2.447
(0.310)

-0.216
(0.228)
2.292
(0.335)

-0.570
(0.251)
2.824
(0.358)

-0.983
(0.324)
2.751
(0.472)

-0.533
(0.443)
1.850
(0.638)

-25.543
(0.205)
-5.078
(0.272)
-0.225
(0.005)
0.012
(0.007)
1.337
(0.075)
-1.966
(0.109)
-0.008
(0.085)
0.386
(0.125)
-0.639
(0.039)
0.253
(0.059)
0.332
(0.070)
-0.077
(0.103)

-25.541
(0.205)
-5.081
(0.272)
-0.224
(0.005)
0.012
(0.007)
1.343
(0.075)
-1.963
(0.109)
-0.006
(0.085)
0.387
(0.125)
-0.639
(0.039)
0.256
(0.059)
0.343
(0.071)
-0.067
(0.104)

-25.765
(0.206)
-4.893
(0.273)
-0.226
(0.005)
0.010
(0.007)
0.969
(0.078)
-1.547
(0.113)
-0.012
(0.085)
0.348
(0.125)
-0.584
(0.039)
0.178
(0.058)
0.311
(0.072)
0.020
(0.105)

-26.292
(0.214)
-4.631
(0.284)
-0.226
(0.005)
0.007
(0.007)
0.851
(0.081)
-1.398
(0.119)
0.002
(0.090)
0.228
(0.132)
-0.573
(0.041)
0.091
(0.062)
0.397
(0.079)
0.059
(0.117)

-25.548
(0.205)
-5.074
(0.272)
-0.224
(0.005)
0.010
(0.007)
1.264
(0.075)
-1.869
(0.108)
0.030
(0.085)
0.318
(0.125)
-0.620
(0.039)
0.229
(0.058)
0.306
(0.071)
-0.025
(0.104)

-25.666
(0.206)
-4.981
(0.274)
-0.225
(0.005)
0.010
(0.007)
1.231
(0.076)
-1.813
(0.110)
0.026
(0.085)
0.303
(0.127)
-0.608
(0.039)
0.205
(0.058)
0.336
(0.072)
-0.019
(0.106)

-26.807
(0.280)
-4.246
(0.373)
-0.228
(0.007)
0.001
(0.010)
0.836
(0.110)
-1.220
(0.160)
0.005
(0.122)
0.296
(0.177)
-0.588
(0.057)
0.161
(0.084)
0.397
(0.110)
0.016
(0.162)

Y

Y
Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Lagged equity share
Lagged equity share ⇥ Post
Age
Age ⇥ Post
Female
Female ⇥ Post
Married
Married ⇥ Post
Log wealth
Log wealth ⇥ Post
Log labor income 2015
Log labor income 2015 ⇥ Post
Controls by year
Baseline
Labor income growth 2016-17
Zip code house price growth 2015-17
Employer industry
Employer
State
County
Employer ⇥ County
R2

0.011

0.156

0.157

Y

0.160

Y

0.207

Y

0.158

Y
0.165

Y
0.417

Notes: This table presents regression coefficients of annual changes in price-constant household portfolio equity shares on the zip code
Republican contribution share, before and after the election, for various sets of controls. The price-constant equity share is calculated
for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is driven by trading only. The baseline controls are the
lagged equity share, age, gender, marital status, log lagged financial wealth, log labor income in 2015, the lagged winning and losing sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth (2010–2015), interacted by annual indicators. In specifications (3)–(8) we
consider additional sets of controls (interacted by yearly dummies) that include ex post income growth (2016–2017) and house price
growth (2015–2017), employer industry indicators (3-digit NAICS), employer indicators, state indicators, county indicators, and employer ⇥ county indicators. The sample is the subset of households with an active portfolio reallocation in the prior year (11.1% of
RIs). The sample period is October 2015 to October 2017, and we include RIs for which we observe the complete set of controls (23.6%
of active RIs). Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.

53

Table 5: Regressions of Price-Constant Equity Share Changes on Likely Political Affiliation, Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
One-year difference in price-constant equity
share (in %), all households
Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share
⇥ Post
Active before
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Active before ⇥ Post
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Age
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Age ⇥ Post
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Log wealth
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Log wealth ⇥ Post
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Log income
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Log income ⇥ Post
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Lagged equity share
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Lagged equity share ⇥ Post
⇥ Zip code Republican contribution share
Controls by year
Baseline
Employer ⇥ County
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.160
(0.059)
0.859
(0.091)

-0.133
(0.057)
0.620
(0.088)
-0.222
(0.226)
2.535
(0.359)

-0.167
(0.059)
0.868
(0.091)

-0.204
(0.060)
0.910
(0.091)

-0.162
(0.059)
0.858
(0.091)

-0.187
(0.060)
0.879
(0.091)

0.590
(0.316)
-3.261
(0.389)

-0.036
(0.005)
0.003
(0.007)
-0.074
(0.038)
0.254
(0.063)
-0.273
(0.082)
0.707
(0.131)
-0.001
(0.350)
-3.001
(0.437)

-0.045
(0.004)
0.051
(0.005)

-0.238
(0.035)
0.355
(0.056)
-0.216
(0.082)
0.626
(0.130)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

0.189

0.191

0.189

0.189

0.189

0.189

Notes: This table presents regression coefficients of annual changes in price-constant household portfolio equity shares on the zip code Republican contribution share, before and after the election. To estimate heterogeneous treatment effects, we also interact the zip code Republican contribution share each year by a dummy
for active portfolio reallocation in the preceding year, age (demeaned), log initial wealth (demeaned), log labor
income in 2015 (demeaned), and the initial equity share (demeaned). The price-constant equity share is calculated for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is driven by trading only. The
baseline controls are the lagged equity share, age, gender, marital status, log lagged financial wealth, log labor
income in 2015, the lagged winning and losing sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth (2010–
2015), interacted by annual indicators. In addition, we control for employer ⇥ county ⇥ period fixed effects.
The sample is our full set of RI households between October 2015 and October 2017, for which we observe the
complete set of controls (27.7% of all RIs). Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.

54

Table 6: Regressions of Price-Constant Equity Share Changes on Likely Political Affiliation for
Subsamples
One-year difference in price-constant equity share (in %)

All
Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share ⇥ Post
Controls by year
Baseline
Employer ⇥ County
R2
Share of observations

Advised
account

Single

Ret.
wealth

Non-ret.
owner

Only
ret.
owner

Non-ret.
wealth

Ret.
wealth,
non-ret.
owner

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.160
(0.059)
0.859
(0.091)

-0.618
(0.677)
0.923
(1.050)

-0.245
(0.103)
0.670
(0.162)

-0.168
(0.058)
0.835
(0.090)

-0.325
(0.213)
1.252
(0.328)

-0.138
(0.061)
0.796
(0.094)

0.134
(0.343)
0.198
(0.490)

-0.428
(0.215)
1.283
(0.326)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

0.189
100.0%

0.570
1.5%

0.257
28.2%

0.188
100.0%

0.307
12.6%

0.197
87.4%

0.312
12.7%

0.304
12.6%

Notes: This table presents regression coefficients of annual changes in price-constant household portfolio equity shares on the zip code
Republican contribution share, before and after the election, in various subsamples of the population: households with advised accounts
(column 2), households with a single (not married) head of household (column 3), wealth in retirement accounts only (4), households with
a non-retirement account (column 5), households with only retirement accounts (column 6), wealth in non-retirement accounts only (column 7), and wealth in retirement accounts for households with a non-retirement account (column 8). The price-constant equity share is
calculated for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is driven by trading only. The baseline controls are
the lagged equity share, age, gender, marital status, log lagged financial wealth, log labor income in 2015, the lagged winning and losing
sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth (2010–2015), interacted by annual indicators. In addition, we control for employer
⇥ county ⇥ period fixed effects. The sample period is October 2015 to October 2017, and we include RIs for which we observe the complete
set of controls (27.7% of all RIs in the full sample). Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.

55

Table 7: Regressions of Changes in Saving Rates on Likely Political Affiliation
Change in
net flow
rate (%)
Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share ⇥ Post
Controls by year
Baseline
Employer ⇥ County
R2
Share of observations

Change in net
saving rate (%),
household

Change in net
saving rate (%),
individual

Change in
contribution
rate (%)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-1.847
(0.196)
1.682
(0.192)

-0.417
(0.239)
0.833
(0.254)

-0.869
(0.101)
0.700
(0.159)

0.041
(0.143)
0.751
(0.277)

-0.732
(0.121)
0.597
(0.213)

0.073
(0.171)
0.635
(0.308)

-0.379
(0.018)
-0.012
(0.022)

-0.118
(0.026)
0.061
(0.037)

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y

0.643
100.0%

0.706
100.0%

0.267
96.6%

0.360
96.6%

0.263
96.6%

0.375
96.6%

0.065
87.8%

0.188
87.8%

Notes: This table presents regression coefficients of annual changes in household saving measures on the zip code Republican contribution share, before and after the election. The net flow rate is constructed as yearly deposits minus withdrawals as a fraction
of initial balances. The net saving rate is defined as yearly deposits minus withdrawals as a fraction of income (derived from dividing annual income evenly over the year). The contribution rate applies only to households actively contributing to a retirement
account. The baseline controls are the lagged saving rate measure, lagged equity share, age, gender, marital status, log lagged financial wealth, log labor income in 2015, the lagged winning and losing sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth
(2010–2015), interacted by annual indicators. In addition, we control for employer ⇥ county ⇥ period fixed effects in even columns.
In column (7)–(8), we also control for the personalized default annual increases of contribution rates. The sample is our full set of RI
households between October 2015 and October 2017, for which we observe the complete set of controls (27.7% of all RIs). Standard
errors are clustered at the zip code level.

56

Table 8: Regressions of Changes in Portfolio Measures on Likely Political Affiliation
A. Market betas

Beta of portfolio

(one-year difference in price-constant beta, ⇥100)

Beta of equity

All

Active

Active

All

Active

Active

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.120
(0.068)
0.831
(0.113)

-0.263
(0.550)
1.416
(0.845)

0.235
(0.265)
2.011
(0.398)

-0.007
(0.051)
-0.014
(0.082)

0.226
(0.512)
-1.151
(0.765)

0.778
(0.247)
-0.624
(0.358)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

R2

0.175

0.392

0.119

0.174

0.358

0.104

B. Sector and global allocations
(one-year difference in price-constant measures, in %)

Winning sectors
share of equity

Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share ⇥ Post
Controls by year
Baseline
Employer ⇥ County

Zip code Republican contribution share
Zip code Republican contribution share ⇥ Post

International
share of equity

All

Active

All

Active

All

Active

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.017
(0.032)
-0.067
(0.048)

0.053
(0.257)
-0.359
(0.367)

0.004
(0.025)
-0.041
(0.038)

0.052
(0.215)
-0.588
(0.327)

-0.068
(0.030)
-0.014
(0.047)

-0.497
(0.217)
0.503
(0.343)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

0.149

0.343

0.209

0.392

0.152

0.348

Controls by year
Baseline
Employer ⇥ County
R2

Losing sectors
share of equity

Notes: This table presents regression coefficients of annual changes in price-constant household portfolio measures on
the zip code Republican contribution share, before and after the election, for the full sample and for the subsample
of households with an active portfolio reallocation in the prior year. The price-constant portfolio measures are calculated for a hypothetical portfolio that is insensitive to passive appreciations and is driven by trading only. Market
betas are obtained by regressing monthly fund or security excess returns on the value-weighted CRSP market excess
return over the period 2006–2019 with at least 24 observations. Winning (losing) sectors are sectors that did relatively
well (poorly) between the election and the end of 2016. International equity holdings consist of individual foreign
company stocks and funds that invest in international equity. The outcome variables that describe the composition
of equity (columns (4)–(12)) are conditional on having strictly positive equity holdings. The baseline controls are the
lagged portfolio measure, age, gender, marital status, log lagged financial wealth, log labor income in 2015, the lagged
winning and losing sectors shares of equity, and zip code house price growth (2010–2015), interacted by annual indicators. In addition, we control for employer ⇥ county ⇥ period fixed effects in most columns. The sample period is
October 2015 to October 2017, and we include RIs for which we observe the complete set of controls (27.7% of all RIs in
the full sample), 97.3% of which have strictly positive equity shares. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code level.

57

