THE JOURNAL OF FINANCE • VOL. LXXIV, NO. 5 • OCTOBER 2019

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social
Interaction? Evidence from a Ponzi Scheme
VILLE RANTALA∗
ABSTRACT
A unique data set from a large Ponzi scheme allows me to study word-of-mouth
diffusion of investment information. Investors could join the scheme only by invitation
from an existing member, which allows me to observe how the idea spreads from one
person to the next based on inviter-invitee relationships. I find that the observed
social network has a scale-free connectivity structure, which significantly facilitates
the diffusion of the investment idea and contributes to the growth and survival of
the socially spreading Ponzi scheme. I further find that investors invest more if their
inviter has comparatively higher age, education, and income.

SHILLER (2000, 2014) ARGUES THAT INVESTMENT ideas can spread like epidemics
among investors, with asset prices influenced by social dynamics. In this paper,
I examine whether large-scale social contagion effects among investors exist,
and if so, what the information diffusion process looks like.
To do so, I employ a data set in which I directly observe the diffusion of an
investment idea from one person to the next. The data set consists of participants of a large investment Ponzi scheme, whereby investors could join only by
personal invitation from an existing member, who was referred to as a sponsor.
This feature allows me to study the effect of word-of-mouth information at an
individual level. Information about the scheme was not publicly available, so
∗ Ville Rantala is with the Miami Business School, University of Miami. I am grateful to the
Finnish National Bureau of Investigations for providing the source documents. Parts of this paper
were previously circulated as a separate working paper entitled “Keeping Up with the Ponzis.” I
thank Nick Barberis, Peter Bossaerts, James Choi, Nicholas Christakis, Henrik Cronqvist, Florian
Ederer, Ester Faia, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong, Hans Hvide, Markku Kaustia, Matti Keloharju, Samuli Knüpfer, Timo Korkeamäki, George Korniotis, Alok Kumar, Juhani Linnainmaa,
Steffen Meyer, Raghu Rau, Sophie Shive, Scott Weisbenner, Charlotte Østergaard, participants at
the Helsinki Finance Summit 2014, European Finance Association Doctoral Tutorial 2015, European Conference on Household Finance 2015, Conference on Behavioral Aspects of Macroeconomics
and Finance 2015, Miami Behavioral Finance Conference 2015, SFS Cavalcade 2016, American
Economic Association 2017, European Retail Investment Conference 2017; as well as seminar participants at BI Norwegian Business School, Cass Business School, Copenhagen Business School,
Georgetown University, HEC Paris, Indiana University, University of Melbourne, University of
Miami, University of New South Wales, Washington University in St. Louis, and Yale University
for helpful comments. I also thank Antti Lehtinen for assistance with geographic information analysis. I acknowledge financial support from the OP Group Research Foundation. The author does
not have any potential conflicts of interest to disclose, as identified in the Journal of Finance’s
disclosure policy.

DOI: 10.1111/jofi.12822

2349

2350

The Journal of FinanceR

when a new investor joins, I know that he has learned about the opportunity
from the inviter. By observing the inviter-invitee social network, I am able
to examine the process through which an investment idea spreads across a
population.
The investment scheme, Wincapita, was a Finnish investment operation that
was active from 2003 to 2008. Wincapita offered its investors large returns, initially claiming that the profits were generated by sports betting and later by
currency trading. In reality, it was a classic Ponzi scheme whereby all incoming
cash flows came from new and existing investors, with none of the profits generated by actual trading or investments. The scheme grew very large, ultimately
growing to over 10,000 members, approximately 0.2% of the total population of
Finland.
The collapse of Wincapita in 2008 led to one of the largest criminal investigations in Finnish history.1 The data used in this study come from the investigation documents of the Finnish National Bureau of Investigation.2 The
documents allow me to identify over 5,000 Wincapita investors and contain
detailed information for over 3,000 investors who were questioned by police. In
addition to details about their investments and withdrawals, these data contain
information on investors’ personal characteristics, such as age, income, location, and education. I combine these data with information on their sponsoring
relationships.3 Because the data were collected from investors in a formal police
interview, they do not suffer from many of the typical reporting and selection
biases that exist in survey data on social relationships. The interviewing officer’s responsibility was to collect facts that could be used as evidence in a court
of law.
Several papers provide theoretical models of information diffusion and the
structure of information networks among investors.4 I present empirical evidence on these phenomena. In particular, the data allow me to shed light on
the social network structure of information diffusion among investors. Empirical social networks that connect people through different kinds of personal
ties exhibit strong structural regularities and differ significantly from random
graph networks in which the connections between nodes are evenly distributed
1 Reported by YLE News on May 5, 2008 (“Wincapitasta tulossa maan laajimpia rikostutkintoja.”)
2 Finnish National Bureau of Investigation, 2010, Esitutkintapöytäkirja 2400/R/61/10.
3 There was a financial incentive to sponsor others. Sponsors received €200 of (virtual) money
for each sponsored investor and 20% of the virtual profits earned by the sponsored investor’s
investments (I discuss this further in Section I below). A sponsor’s sponsor would not receive any
portion of these profits, so Wincapita was not a traditional pyramid scheme whereby the profits
are determined by the investor’s level in the “pyramid.”
4 Stein (2008), Han and Yang (2013), and Andrei and Cujean (2017) model the transmission
of information through personal communication between investors. Ozsoylev and Walden (2011)
study the asset pricing implications of large information networks. Shiller and Pound (1989),
Shiller (2000), and Shive (2010) argue that epidemic models can be used to characterize the
diffusion of social interest among investors. For general models of word-of-mouth communication,
see Ellison and Fudenberg (1995), Banerjee and Fudenberg (2004), and Cao, Han and Hirshleifer
(2011).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2351

(see Jackson and Rogers (2007) for a review). However, because the diffusion
of word-of-mouth information is typically unobservable, there is little evidence
on whether these structures play a role in the diffusion of information within
the networks. In social networks, the distribution of connections per node
typically has a heavy right tail, and the average node to node distances are
short. I find that both of these characteristics exist in the diffusion process of
Wincapita.
In particular, the distribution of the number of connections per node in Wincapita’s sponsoring network decays approximately as a power law. The empirical probability of sponsoring k investors is proportional to the power of k, so
that P(k) ∼ k−γ where γ is a constant. The power-law characteristic is visually apparent in a log-log plot, and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistics based
on a fitted power-law model strongly support the view that the data follow a
power law. Networks with this structure are known as scale-free networks,
and power-law distributions are very common in empirical social networks
(Barabási (2009)). Here, the power law indicates that a small minority of investors are responsible for most of the social effect.
I compare Wincapita’s actual sponsoring network to a simulated random
network and find that the power-law topology has a dramatic effect on the rate
at which information spreads. The random network has the same number of
investors, the same percentage of sponsors, and the same average number of
sponsored investors per sponsor. The only difference compared to the actual
network is that the distribution of the number of sponsored investors follows
a Poisson distribution instead of the power law, as in the model of Erdős and
Renyi (1959). The results show that an epidemic that spreads through the
Wincapita network one step at a time reaches all investors in 15 steps. In
comparison, in the simulated network, it takes an average of 161 network steps
to reach the same number of investors. When I calibrate a simple Ponzi scheme
model to both networks, I find that the actual network can sustain significantly
higher payouts relative to investors’ investments without collapsing.
The network structure also provides information about the diffusion dynamics of Wincapita. I find that the cumulative number of investors as a function
of network distance from the originator of the scheme follows an S-shaped
curve. The S-curve implies that information diffusion within social networks
progresses in a nonlinear fashion.
I next analyze how social connections within the scheme are related to participants’ investment decisions. After controlling for personal characteristics
and inviter fixed effects, I find that investors invest statistically significantly
more if their inviter has comparatively higher income, age, and education.
The marginal effect of the inviter’s income is highest when it is just above
the invitee’s income, suggesting that it may be a reference point in decision
making. I also find that sponsors invest more than nonsponsors, which indicates that social behavior and investment behavior are correlated among
investors.
This paper contributes to the literature in several ways. First, I show that an
investment idea can spread across the population through social interaction,

2352

The Journal of FinanceR

gradually affecting larger and larger groups of people, as predicted by Shiller
(2000). The existence of behavior contagion in the capital markets is well
documented,5 but whether word-of-mouth information can lead to large-scale
diffusion of behaviors that can be characterized by epidemic models is an open
question in the literature. In this paper, I observe an epidemic that is spread
solely by word-of-mouth communication.
A major implication of Wincapita’s network structure is that an investment
idea can spread rapidly and extensively through social interactions even if most
people are just passive receivers of information or share the idea with only one
or two others. The connectivity structure of scale-free networks is dominated
by a few highly connected hubs, and models in network epidemiology show
that epidemics arise and spread in scale-free networks at a much faster rate
than in random spreading, where each infective individual is equally likely
to spread the epidemic (Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani (2001), Barthélemy
et al. (2004)). The highly connected hubs facilitate the diffusion of epidemics
because, all else being equal, people with many social connections are more
likely to be infected early when an epidemic spreads through the network.
The models show that an epidemic starting at a random point in any scalefree network will quickly reach a highly connected hub, and in the next stage,
the hub will infect a large number of nodes. The model calibration exercise in
this paper further shows how this commonly observed social network structure can contribute to the growth and survival of socially spreading Ponzi
schemes.
More generally, my findings provide support for the use of a scale-free
topology in modeling information networks among investors. Real-world social
networks may not be completely pure scale-free networks, but a power-law
model clearly characterizes the Wincapita network better than a random
graph model. Ozsoylev and Walden (2011) derive asset pricing implications
of a scale-free information network between agents and motivate their choice
of network topology by the prevalence of scale-free structures in empirical
networks.
The observed S-shaped curve in information diffusion is consistent with extant theories on social diffusion among investors. Shiller and Pound (1989),
Shiller (2000), and Shive (2010) argue that susceptible-infective-removed type
5 Shiller and Pound (1989) argue that interpersonal communication significantly affects individual investors’ decision. Shiller (2000, 2014) argues that diffusion of investment information across
social networks plays a crucial role in the formation of asset pricing bubbles. Empirically, prior evidence indicates that social interaction affects bank run participation (Kelly and Ó Gráda (2000),
Iyer and Puri (2012)), professional money managers’ portfolios (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005),
Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker (2015)), retirement plan decisions (Duflo and Saez (2002, 2003)), stock
market participation (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004), Brown et al. (2008)), trading behavior (Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2005), Ivković and Weisbenner (2007), Hvide and Östberg (2015)), and trust in
financial institutions (Gurun, Stoffman, and Yonker (2018)). Personal information networks can
also affect investors’ trading returns (Ozsoylev et al. (2014)) and they play an important role in
illegal insider trading (Ahern (2017)). See Hirshleifer and Teoh (2009) for a general review of
behavior contagion in capital markets.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2353

epidemic models commonly used to model the diffusion of diseases can be used
to characterize diffusion of interest in individual stocks. Such models imply that
the cumulative number of people affected by an epidemic follows an S-shaped
logistic curve over time.
The finding that investors invest more relative to their own income if their
sponsor has comparatively higher age, income, and education suggests that
the source of word-of-mouth information matters, with investors paying more
attention to information that comes from a source perceived to be credible. The
observation that investors invest more relative to their own income when their
sponsor has comparatively higher income is also consistent with “keeping up
with the Joneses” behavior.
The results of this paper are also related to the literature on outcome-based
learning in investment decisions.6 The track record of high returns earned
by Wincapita members was undoubtedly helpful in recruiting new investors.
The relevance of peers’ personally generated financial gains, together with the
observed S-curve, can explain why social epidemics among investors can take
years to develop. Several generations of new investors with personal profits
may be required before a socially spreading investment idea reaches a tipping
point, infecting a sufficiently large number of investors, that growth is rapid
thereafter.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides background
on the scheme, describes the data, and summarizes investor characteristics.
Section II studies the diffusion of the scheme focusing on network characteristics. Section III examines the role of personal characteristics in the diffusion
of investment information. Section IV studies investors’ investment decisions.
Section V concludes.

I. Background, Data, and Investor Characteristics
This section provides background on Wincapita, describes the data, and summarizes Wincapita investor characteristics. All information in this section (unless otherwise stated) comes from the police investigation documents related
to Wincapita.7

6 Shiller (2000) argues that extrapolation from observed high returns can generate naturally
occurring Ponzi processes in the market. Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012) show that recent stock
returns of peers affect stock market entry decisions. They also argue that extrapolation from
others’ outcomes can play a part in the success of Ponzi-type securities scams. Han and Hirshleifer
(2013) argue that investors are particularly likely to discuss their positive returns with others,
which can result in a self-enhancing transmission bias in word-of-mouth communication.
7 A detailed description of Wincapita’s activities is provided in sections 3 to 9 of the police
investigation material. Early media reports following the collapse of the scheme contained many
inaccuracies related to the details and rules of the scheme, because little information was publicly
available. Inaccurate information still exists in many online sources on Wincapita that use these
media reports as a reference. The police investigation, which documented details of the scheme,
was concluded in 2010.

2354

The Journal of FinanceR

A. Wincapita as an Investment Scheme
Wincapita8 was described to its investors as an investment club that could
generate significant profits on members’ investments. All operations of Wincapita were carried out on the Internet, and investors used the Wincapita website to manage their investment. The website, which could only be accessed
with a personal user name and password, provided general information and
news about the club and showed investors how their investment performed over
time. Money transfers into and out of the club were handled through a British
Internet payment service called Moneybookers. Wincapita had an account with
Moneybookers and investors could transfer their money using another account
with the same service. Most investors set up their own Moneybookers account
but they could alternatively transfer their money using a friend’s account.
Wincapita’s website and account in Moneybookers were the entire scope of
the scheme’s operations. When investors withdrew money from the scheme, the
funds were paid out of the same account used to invest their funds, and no new
funds were generated by actual trading or operations at any point. The virtual
profits shown on Wincapita’s website were totally fictitious and had no link to
any real-world investment assets.
The scheme was run solely by one man named Hannu Kailajärvi. He had
computer programming experience, but no background in finance. Although
some individuals helped with website updates and practical issues at different
stages of the club, the police investigation indicates that Kailajärvi was the
only person who knew the entire nature of the operation. Kailajärvi’s identity
was generally known among investors, but he was rarely in direct contact
with them and managed the club through the website and e-mail. Investors
were led to believe that the club was a much larger international operation.
Kailajärvi managed this deception, for example, by using fictitious names in
e-mail responses to give the impression that the scheme had a large number of
employees. He also set up shell companies abroad, first in Wyoming and later
in Panama. In reality, the club did not even have a bookkeeping system or a
legal structure. The shell companies provided Wincapita with documentation
that could be shown to investors, but they had no actual operations.
B. Timeline of the Events and the End of Wincapita
Wincapita began operating in the fall of 2003 and originally claimed that it
was generating profits for investors using a betting system for international
horse racing. In early 2005, the club announced that it would shift its focus
to currency trading. From that time until the end of the scheme in 2008, the
source of income was claimed to be a trading system that could create large
8 The name of the club changed twice during its existence. Initially, the club was named Giiclub;
between 2004 and 2007, it was named Winclub. For clarity, I refer to it as Wincapita throughout
the text. Wincapita is also the general name the police investigation documents use when referring
to the scheme. In the scheme’s internal communications, the name was often spelled with a capital
C (WinCapita).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2355

profits by day trading on the EUR/USD exchange rate. Wincapita further stated
that it planned to generate additional earnings in the long run by licensing and
selling its trading system to international customers. A feature that may have
strengthened investors’ faith in Wincapita toward the end of its existence was
that they could follow trading signals allegedly generated by the club’s computer system in real time through a web application. The application showed
actual real-time EUR/USD currency data together with different “signal markers,” whose functioning was not divulged to investors. Details about the club’s
operations were often referred to as business secrets, which kept members in
the dark about its actual activities. They could follow the profits their investments had earned, but were not informed about the specific transactions or
trades that generated them.
Wincapita first came to public attention in September 2007 when an investigative TV-journalist broadcasted a news story about the club and raised
doubts about its profit mechanism, speculating that it may function like a Ponzi
scheme.9 Paradoxically, police interview transcripts indicate that the media
coverage strengthened many investors’ faith in the club. The club continued
to operate without any significant reaction from authorities, and a number of
investors assumed that the authorities had investigated the club and found its
operations to be legitimate.
Wincapita’s activities ended in the beginning of March 2008 when Hannu
Kailajärvi fled from Finland and shut down the club’s website. He evaded
the police for nine months and was finally arrested in northern Sweden in
December 2008 after an international manhunt. Kailajärvi destroyed the club’s
records and website while on the run, thus denying investors the ability to
withdraw any money from the club. Wincapita’s bank account had a balance
of €4.8 million at the time of Kailajärvi’s disappearance, soon after which the
account was frozen by authorities.
Police investigation of Wincapita’s bank statements shows that the total
amount of funds that investors transferred into Wincapita during its existence exceeded €100 million.10 The police interview transcripts indicate that
the collapse of the club not only led to large financial losses, but also destroyed
personal relationships between sponsors and their sponsored investors. The
documents contain several mentions of suicides, divorces, and mental health
problems following the club’s collapse, with the social invitation structure possibly contributing to these consequences. Kailajärvi’s disappearance and arrest
also sparked conspiracy theories among some Wincapita members, with the interview transcripts indicating that several investors refused to accept that the
club had been fraudulent, regardless of the police evidence.
The main reason Wincapita could operate without interference for so long
was that it was difficult for the Finnish authorities to obtain information on
9

The police documents identify this news story, which aired on September 23, as the first public
news coverage about the scheme.
10 This figure comes from police investigation material section 4.4, which provides an analysis
of Wincapita’s bank statements and investors’ aggregate deposits and withdrawals.

2356

The Journal of FinanceR

its operations. In particular, because of the sponsorship system, there was no
publicly available information about the club, and as long as no one suffered
any losses, there was no imminent cause for a police investigation. Currency
trading is less regulated than most other areas of the financial markets and
the Finnish Financial Supervision Authority deemed in the fall of 2007 that,
based on available information, Wincapita’s operations did not fall under its
supervision. Many potential sources of information were located abroad and
could not be accessed by the authorities absent clear evidence of a crime: when
Wincapita folded, its remaining shell company was in Panama, its bank account
was in the United Kingdom, and the website was on a server in Luxembourg.
C. Wincapita’s Rules and Investor Incentives
According to police documents, the fictitious returns earned by investors
were in the range of several hundred percent over a period of six months (there
is some variation depending on the time and source). Kailajärvi destroyed all
of Wincapita’s records and web content when he fled, so police estimates are
based on witness testimonies and copies of material and printouts collected
from investors. Records of the virtual funds that investors had in their account
were also destroyed.
Wincapita stipulated that when a member made an investment, the invested
funds had to stay in the club for a minimum of six months. After that, the funds,
including the makeshift profits, could be reinvested or withdrawn (in full or
part) from the club upon request. The minimum investment required to join
the club increased throughout its existence, to €3,000 by the time the club
collapsed. Part of the initial investment was said to cover the fees of the club.
Members could gain additional profits by recruiting new investors into the
club, but they were not required or expected to do so. Investors received €200
of virtual funds in their Wincapita account for each person they sponsored, as
well as 20% of the profits generated by the funds that were invested by their
sponsored investors.11 A sponsor’s sponsor would not receive any part of these
profits. In addition to 20% of an investor’s profits that went to their sponsor,
10% were said to go to the club to cover its costs, so an individual investor
would receive a total of 70% of the virtual profits “earned” by their investment.
Wincapita required that sponsors personally know all of the investors who
they invite to join the club as the club did not want to attract public attention.
A copy of its rules obtained by police shows that Wincapita explicitly forbade
members from distributing information about the club through websites, news
groups, web forums, mass e-mails, or other forms of public media.
Although public distribution of information about the club was forbidden,
active Wincapita investors occasionally organized Wincapita-related meetings
11 According to police documents, these rules were in place since at least January 1, 2007.
There may have been some variation in the figures before that date. The general sponsoring
system remained similar over the course of Wincapita’s existence. Evidence on Wincapita’s rules
is recorded in the “Attachments to the Introduction” section of the police investigation material
(pages 2294-2339).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2357

that were attended by other club members and friends who were potentially
interested in investing in the club. Some of the meetings were purely social
events, such as Christmas parties and boat cruises, while others were information sessions about the club and its developments. Wincapita’s rules required
that the meetings could not be open to the general public and members had to
seek permission from the club before they could organize any Wincapita-related
event. Police interview records indicate that 11% of the investors questioned
had participated in a Wincapita-related meeting.12
As Ponzi schemes usually offer significant profits to investors who join early,
it is natural to wonder whether certain investors suspected that they were
investing in a Ponzi scheme and tried to strategically benefit from it with the
intention of reaping the early profits. In the case of Wincapita, it would have
been very difficult to carry out such a strategy. Chapter 10 of the Finnish
Criminal Code mandates that any financial gain made as a result of criminal
activity has to be paid to the state even if the person receiving the gain has not
committed a crime and has acted in good faith. After the police investigation
began, this law was applied to investors who had made large gains from Wincapita with an amount of their assets equal to their net gain from Wincapita
frozen by the authorities.13 Another factor that would have made such strategic
behavior very risky is that investors were required to commit their funds for a
period of six months, which is a long time to wait if the scheme might collapse
at any moment. Even if some individuals tried to behave strategically despite
these considerations, they still would have learned about the scheme from an
investor they know personally, and hence the investment decision would have
been based on socially transmitted information.
D. Description of Data
The data for this study are hand-collected from the police investigation documents of the main criminal case against Wincapita. The investigation documents have been combined into a single formal document known as a pretrial
protocol, under the official document number 2400/R/81/10. The pretrial protocol contains a summary of the police investigation, interview and interrogation
transcripts, and copies of relevant evidence, such as bank statements, investigation reports, and e-mails. The document comprises more than 53,000 pages
of material, the majority of which is related to individual investors’ interviews.

12 When calculating this percentage, I count as a meeting any event outside a club member’s
home or workplace that was attended by several club members. Early media reports that followed
the collapse of the scheme falsely claimed that most investors had joined Wincapita after attending
a club-related meetings or social gatherings. This percentage shows that the majority of investors
interviewed never attended any such event.
13 The final decisions on the loss of assets were made in separate trials for each individual.
These separate trials could not begin before a final court decision in the main case against Hannu
Kailajärvi. In a similar vein, bankruptcy clawback litigation has also been used to recover false
profits from Ponzi scheme investors in many cases in the United States.

2358

The Journal of FinanceR

The content of the pretrial protocol is public information by court decision, but
there are legal restrictions on the collection and use of personal information.14
The investor data come from the police interviews of Wincapita members,
which were carried out between 2008 and 2010. Details on the data collection
and specific definitions of different data items are reported in the Internet
Appendix. The interview documents record the full name and social security
number or date of birth of all investors interviewed. Data items collected from
the investigation material include total invested amount, first invested amount,
total withdrawn amount, investor gender, age (at the end of 2007), home coordinates, education level, and a binary variable, indicating whether the person
is an entrepreneur. Additionally, I match annual taxable income for 2007 to
each investor based on a publicly available income listing that contains earned
and capital income for all tax subjects for whom one of the two exceeds €12,000
per year.15
I identify sponsorship relationships based on answers to several police interview questions, namely, “Who was your sponsor?,” “Did you sponsor anyone?,”
and “Do you know people who were above your sponsor in the Wincapita structure?” These questions were asked in all of the police interviews. Based on the
responses to these questions, I am able to identify many investors who were
not personally questioned by police, and thus add them to the network.16
E. Data Limitations
Because I can only observe people who accepted an offer to join Wincapita,
I cannot make causal statements about personal characteristics related to the
decision to invest. Moreover, I have to limit investment behavior analyses to
explaining the amount invested conditional on joining the scheme. One possible
concern that arises is that some sponsors may have tried to target higher
income friends because the sponsor benefited from Wincapita profits earned by
sponsored investors. The findings in Section III.B suggest that such behavior
was either not very common or successful, as most investors’ income is lower
than that of their sponsor.
Another limitation is that I have to restrict the sample to investors identified
in the police investigation documents. To account for possible selection bias
14 The Finnish Personal Data Act allows personal data to be collected for scientific research
purposes. Registry documentation required by the act has been maintained throughout the data
collection. The sensitive nature of the data set limits my ability to match these data with other
sources that contain personal information. See Internet Appendix Section III for details. The
Internet Appendix is available in the online version of this article on the Journal of Finance
website.
15 The listing is “Veropörssi Magazine,” which uses Finnish tax authority data as its source.
Published listings of similar scope are not available for other years.
16 The documents do not provide information on people who were invited to join Wincapita but
declined, likely because the police were interested only in actual crime victims. By way of analogy,
the data that I have resemble a typical data set on disease contagion in the sense that I can observe
the diffusion of an epidemic, but I cannot observe people who were exposed to the epidemic but
remained unaffected.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2359

Table I

Statistics on Sample Investors and Data Availability
This table reports summary statistics on sample investors and data availability. Panel A provides
statistics on data availability based on the number of observations with nonmissing values for
different data items. Place in network refers to investors whose sponsor is known or who have
sponsored someone. Location is based on the person’s street address. Panel B provides summary
statistics on investors’ personal characteristics. Detailed variable definitions are provided in Internet Appendix Section II
Panel A: Data Availability (Number of Observations with Each Characteristic)
Place in Network
5,523
Annual Income
2,806

Year of Joining
3,352
Location
3,280

Total Invested Amount
3,323
Education
2,604

First Invested Amount
3,204
All Characteristics
2,128

Panel B: Investor Characteristics
Characteristics As % of Observations
Female
Entrepreneur
19.72%
25.91%
Age at the End of 2007
Average
46.2
Education Level
Basic Education
12.83%

Age < 30
9.52%

Age > 60
12.31%

First Quartile
37

Median
46

Third Quartile
55

Upper Secondary
Education
49.27%

Higher
Education
22.39%

Master’s
Degree
14.98%

Median
33.7

Third Quartile
48.2

Annual Income (Thousands of Euros)
Average
First Quartile
47.6
23.9

Doctoral
Degree
0.54%

among the investors who police contacted for an interview, I run robustness
checks in which I only include investors who contacted the police by their
own initiative. Internet Appendix Section IV provides further discussion on
potential data limitations and biases and the approaches that I take to address
them. The Internet Appendix also discusses the generalizability of the findings
in the light of other Ponzi schemes.
F. Investor Characteristics
Table I reports summary statistics for Wincapita investors. The percentage
of investors with higher education (at least a bachelor’s degree) is 37.9 and the
percentage with higher than mandatory basic education 87.2. Average investor
taxable income is €47,650 per year and the median is €33,650. The income
distribution has a heavy right tail: the highest 10% earn over €74,400, and
three individuals earn more than a million euros per year.17 Comparisons with
17

When interpreting the income figures, one should note that the observations do not include
people whose income is below €12,000. The professions mentioned in the police documents indicate

2360

The Journal of FinanceR

Finnish population statistics described in Internet Appendix Section V indicate that both education and taxable income are higher among the Wincapita
investor sample than among the general population. A possible explanation is
that low-income people did not have any savings to invest in Wincapita.
The taxable income figures may include profits withdrawn from Wincapita
during 2007. Investors typically reported their withdrawn funds as capital income, which the tax authority taxed accordingly.18 Whether Wincapita income
should be considered different from other sources of income in this paper’s analyses can be debatable. On the one hand, it can raise observed income above
its “true” earnings-based level. On the other hand, the withdrawn funds could
affect the individuals’ behavior similarly as other income sources, especially if
investors believed that Wincapita would allow them to sustain a higher income
level in the future.19
Investor summary statistics also show that males and entrepreneurs, who
tend to have high overconfidence based on the previous literature, are well
represented in the sample. Males constitute 80% of the investors, and 26% are
entrepreneurs. By comparison, the percentage of males among Finnish stock
market participants is 58 (Keloharju and Lehtinen (2015)), and according to
OECD statistics, 6% of Finnish employed males and 2% of employed females
were entrepreneurs in 2008. Males have been linked to overconfident behavior
and risk-taking in investment decisions (Barber and Odean (2001), Grinblatt
and Keloharju (2009)), and entrepreneurial overconfidence is documented by
Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg (1988), among others.
Table II, Panel A, reports summary statistics on the invested amounts. The
statistics show that the average amount invested in Wincapita is €15,100 with
a median of €8,000. These invested amounts represent the total amount of
funds an investor transferred into Wincapita during its existence. The invested
amounts are economically significant, as the median income of an investor is
€34,000 per year and the median investor invested an amount that corresponds
to 23% of his annual income gross of taxes. Moreover, Keloharju and Lehtinen
(2015) report that the median Finnish stock portfolio in 2015 is worth €4,200,
which indicates that the median Wincapita investment is almost twice as large
as the combined value of all stock holdings of a typical Finnish stock market
participant. The smallest Wincapita investment in the data is €20 and the
largest is €1.6 million.
that many individuals who do not have income data are not in working life. People in this category
include, for example, students, pensioners, and housewives, as well as individuals who live or work
abroad.
18 The full tax implications of Wincapita income (had it been a real investment scheme) may have
been unclear to many investors because of its international nature and opaque business model.
Investors who did not report all of their withdrawals as taxable income were not necessarily
engaging in deliberate tax evasion.
19 I cannot observe whether the income figures include income from Wincapita, but in a robustness check, I exclude individuals who made withdrawals when analyzing income differences within
the sponsor-sponsored investor pairs. When withdrawers are excluded, the average and median
income in the data are €46,200 and €33,300 respectively, with the median still higher than in the
general population.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2361

Table II

Statistics on Wincapita Investments and Sponsoring Behavior
This table reports statistics on Wincapita investors’ invested and withdrawn amounts, year of
joining, and number of sponsored investors. Panel A provides summary statistics on the invested
and withdrawn amounts based on the money transferred into and out of Wincapita in euros.
Panel B reports the distribution of the sample investors’ year of joining. Panel C reports summary
statistics on the number of people sponsored by a sponsor (an investor who has invited at least
one person into the scheme). Statistics in Panel C also include investors who were not personally
questioned by police, but could be identified based on other investors’ answers during the police
investigation
Panel A: Invested and Withdrawn Amounts (Thousands of Euros)
Average

Min

p25

p50

p75

Max

15
6
37
6

0.02
0.02
0.004
−1,527

4
3
2
3

8
4
7
6

15
7
24
13

1,599
126
1,667
1,597

Total Invested Amount
First Invested Amount
Amount Withdrawn
Total Invested Amount Minus Withdrawals

Percentage of Investors Who Made Withdrawals
Percentage of Investors Who Withdrew at Least €1,000
Percentage of Investors Who Withdrew at Least €10,000
Percentage of Investors Who Withdrew More Money than They Invested

26.5
22.5
10.6
11.9

Panel B: Year of Joining

% of Investors

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

1.4

7.0

10.1

12.0

43.2

26.3

Panel C: Statistics on the Number of People Sponsored by a Sponsor
Average First Quartile Median Third Quartile
Value of the Statistic

3.7

1

2

3

Number of Sponsored People
Observations

One
650

2 to 4
498

5 to 10
179

11 to 20
64

Max
120
21 to 40 Over 40
26
8

The data further show that the percentage of investors who withdrew money
from the scheme is 26.5% with 10.6% withdrawing more than €10,000. Most
investors who took money out (56%) withdrew less than they invested. Cases
where an investor claims to have exited the scheme before its collapse are rare,
accounting for 1.2% of the observations.
Panel B of Table II reports the distribution of investors’ year of joining. Most
investors joined during the last years of the scheme, with 43% joining in 2007
and 26% joining in 2008 before the demise of the club. Based on the annual
values, the growth of Wincapita can be described as exponential: an exponential
curve ( yt = aebt ) fitted to annual observations of the number of new investors
has an R2 of 90.1%, whereas a linear model has an R2 of 61.5%.20 The data also
20

When fitting the curve, I multiply the number of investors who joined in 2003 by 3 and the
number of investors who joined in 2008 by 6 to account for the fact that the first investors joined
in September 2003 and the scheme ended at the beginning of March 2008.

2362

The Journal of FinanceR

Figure 1. The cumulative amount of funds invested in Wincapita since January 1, 2005.
This figure shows the cumulative amount of funds invested in Wincapita between the beginning
of 2005 and the collapse of the club in 2008. The figure is based on weekly observations of the
amount of new funds transferred into Wincapita’s account. The amounts invested before 2005 are
not available with weekly accuracy in the police documents and therefore are not included in the
figure. The y-axis has ordinary scale in the upper graph and logarithmic scale in the lower graph.

show that it takes a relatively long time for the scheme to be transmitted from
one person to the next: for the 1,248 sponsor-sponsored investor pairs for which
I can identify the month of joining for both investors, the average difference in
their time of joining is 10.7 months and the median is 7 months.
As an alternative way to measure the growth of the scheme, in Figure 1,
I plot the cumulative amount of new funds invested in the scheme between
January 2005 and March 2008 based on the weekly amount of funds transferred into Wincapita’s Moneybookers account. As can be seen, the cumulative invested amount shown grows almost linearly in logarithmic scale after
the first few months, which also supports the view that the growth of the
scheme was exponential. Compared to a sample of 376 Ponzi schemes prosecuted by the SEC (Deason, Rajgopal, and Waymire (2015)), Wincapita is considerably larger than the median scheme based on both invested funds (median
$14.7 million) and the number of investors (median 150).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2363

Figure 2. Wincapita’s sponsoring relationships as a social network. This graph illustrates
Wincapita as a social network. The dots are individual investors and the lines connecting them
represent the sponsoring relationships. The larger dot in the middle is the originator of the scheme,
Hannu Kailajärvi. The graph includes all investors who can be linked to Hannu Kailajärvi through
a chain of sponsors. It is drawn using the Fruchterman-Reingold (1991) algorithm. The distances
between points are determined by the algorithm and have no economic interpretation as such.
Investors with different network distances are denoted with different color shades. Here, network
distance measures the number of sponsors between an investor and Hannu Kailajärvi. Kailajärvi
is directly connected to seven investors in the graph. (Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com)

II. Wincapita as a Social Network
In this section, I study Wincapita’s sponsoring relationships as a social network. Specifically, I analyze the connectivity structure of the sponsoring network, the geographic diffusion of the scheme, and the cumulative number of
affected investors as a function of network distance.
A. The Structure of the Sponsoring Network and Geographic Diffusion
of the Scheme
Figure 2 provides a network graph of the sponsoring relationships based
on all investors who can be connected to Hannu Kailajärvi through the chain
of sponsors. The large dot in the middle represents Hannu Kailajärvi. The

2364

The Journal of FinanceR

figure can be interpreted as a tree diagram showing how the investment scheme
spread from one person to the next. In the popular press, Ponzi schemes are
often depicted as pyramids, where each old investor appoints a fixed number
of new members. This characterization does not fit the network structure observed in Figure 2, which shows large clusters of investors connected to certain
sponsors and most investors not sponsoring another investor.
The network structure also shows that an investor’s social influence often
extends beyond the people to whom he is directly connected. For instance, if
an investor in Figure 2 sponsors another investor, in 39% of cases, at least one
of the sponsored investors is also a sponsor who spreads the idea further. The
household finance literature has little to say on how widely peer effects spread
beyond the first step in social networks.
Figure 3 provides two maps that depict the geographic coverage of Wincapita.
The first map illustrates the geographic network of sponsoring relationships
based on the home locations of sponsors and their sponsored investors. The
areas that have a large number of connections correspond roughly to the largest
cities in Finland, and most geographic hubs are also connected to one another.
The map indicates that investment ideas travel with people, and even distant
cities can have a large number of connections between them. This implies that
the routes that are typically traveled by people may be a better predictor of the
geographic diffusion of word-of-mouth information than the distance between
areas.
The second map summarizes the geographic coverage of the scheme based
on the number of sample investors as a percentage of the population in Finnish
municipalities. Most municipalities have investors, and 18 out of the 19 Finnish
administrative regions (maakunta) are covered. The only exception is the
Swedish-speaking autonomous region of the Åland islands.
B. Connectivity Structure of the Sponsoring Network
I next analyze the distribution of the number of sponsored investors among
sponsors (investors who invited others into Wincapita). The degree distribution, which captures the distribution of the number of connections per node, is
of significant interest in network analysis because it determines the connectivity structure of a network and hence affects the flow of information in social
networks (Barabási (2002)).
A common observation in empirical studies on communication within social
groups is that the large majority of individuals in a group obtain most of their
socially transmitted information from a very small subset of people.21 Many
empirical social networks also have a scale-free connectivity structure whereby
21 Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet (1948) and Katz and Lazarsfeld (1955) provide seminal
results on this phenomenon. The fact that a few socially powerful individuals, “market mavens,”
are important for the diffusion of word-of-mouth information on consumer products is widely
recognized in marketing (see, e.g., Feick and Price (1987)). In the field of financial economics,
Benartzi and Thaler (2007) provide anecdotal evidence, suggesting that powerful social influencers
have a strong impact on retirement plan decisions within a supermarket chain. Banerjee et al.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2365

Figure 3. The geographic coverage of Wincapita. This figure provides two maps illustrating
the geographic coverage of Wincapita. Both maps are based on the investors who were questioned
by police. The map on the left shows Wincapita’s sponsoring relationships on a map of Finland.
The red lines represent the sponsoring relationships and each line connects an investor and a
sponsor. Investors’ locations are based on the home addresses reported in the police interview
documents. The lines are drawn based on all observations for which both the investor’s location
and the sponsor’s location are known. Investors whose location is outside Finland are excluded. The
map also shows the borders of Finnish municipalities in the background. The black circles show the
locations of the largest cities in Finland. The locations indicated by the circles include the Helsinki
metropolitan area and the 10 next largest cities. The map on the right shows statistics on the
number of Wincapita investors as a percentage of the population in different municipalities. The
percentages are calculated as the number of investors questioned divided by the total population
of the municipality. Different percentage range categories are denoted with different colors and
the range corresponding to each color is reported in the figure. The municipalities with white
background color do not have any investors in the sample. The true Wincapita investor densities
are higher than those shown in the map because the reported percentages are based only on the
investors who were questioned by police. (Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com)

(2014) show that individuals can identify the influencers in their community even if they are
not aware of its social network structure. Galeotti and Goyal (2010) provide an economic model
that explains the existence of a few powerful influencers through the costs of acquiring personal
information.

2366

The Journal of FinanceR

the heavy right tail of the degree distribution approximately follows a powerlaw distribution (Barabási 2002, 2009).22 If the connections between network
nodes are instead formed randomly, so that all node pairs have an equal probability of being connected, the connectivity follows a Poisson distribution (Erdős
and Rényi (1959)).
I find that Wincapita’s degree distribution is highly skewed. Table II, Panel
C, shows that 25% of the scheme’s investors are sponsors. The average number of sponsored investors across sponsors is 3.72 and the median is 2.0. The
largest number of sponsored investors in the data is 120, with 2% of sponsors sponsoring more than 20 investors. To provide evidence on whether the
degree distribution exhibits power-law characteristics, I employ two samples.
The main sample is based on all sponsoring relationships in the data. The
second sample is based on those investors who contacted the police on their
own initiative. I refer to the second sample as the restricted sample. (Internet
Appendix Section I provides information on why certain people may have been
contacted by the police). The restricted sample serves as a robustness check
for both possible missing sponsor-investor relationships and possible selection
bias among those investors who were approached by the police. In the restricted
sample, the number of investors sponsored by sponsor i is given as the number
of investors who approached the police themselves and identified sponsor i as
their sponsor.
The power-law relationship P(k) ∼ k−γ implies that logarithms of k and logarithms of the corresponding empirical frequencies are linearly related. Figure 4
provides histograms of the number of sponsored investors for both samples
and also log-log graphs of empirical frequencies and the cumulative probability distribution P(k). The log-log plots for both samples approximately follow a
straight line after the first observations, indicating that there is negative linear
dependency between the two log-variables. The linear shapes in the graphs are
consistent with a power-law distribution and the slope is somewhat steeper in
the restricted sample.
If the connections between nodes in a network are formed randomly as in
the Erdős-Rényi (1959) model, the connectivity always follows a Poisson distribution with a peak at some P(k) and a variance of k equal to the mean k. The
histograms in Figure 4 do not indicate such a pattern. In the main sample, the
mean is 3.72 and the variance is 46.7, and in the second (restricted) sample, the
mean is 1.94 and the variance is 3.96. Based on these figures, the distributions
are too overdispersed to fit a Poisson model, and the structure of the network
is clearly different from a uniformly random model.
As a more formal test, I fit a power-law model to the data using maximum likelihood optimization. I follow the standard procedure for power-law
22 The most commonly offered explanation for the power-law distributions observed in empirical
social networks is preferential attachment, whereby people with many social connections are more
likely to generate new connections in the future. This snowball effect in connectivity over time
can result in a power-law distribution in the number of connections per node (Barabási and Albert
(1999)). A large number of other empirical regularities in economics and finance also have a powerlaw form (Gabaix (2009)).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2367

Figure 4. Histograms and log-log plots based on the number of sponsored investors.
These histograms and log-log plots show the distribution of the number of investors sponsored by a
sponsor in the Wincapita sample. The graphs on the left are based on all observations in the sample
and the graphs on the right are based on the restricted sample (investors who contacted police
by their own initiative). The histograms plot the frequency of observations on the y-axis and the
number of sponsored investors on the x-axis. The log-log graphs in the middle plot log(frequency)
based on the number of observations on the y-axis and log(number of sponsored investors) on the
x-axis. They also include a fitted linear regression line based on the individual plots. The log-log
graphs in the bottom of the figure plot the cumulative probability P(k) on the y-axis and the number
of sponsored investors on the x-axis.

2368

The Journal of FinanceR

tail analysis and fit a power-law distribution where P (X = k) = k−γ for distribution values exceeding some threshold value kmin .23 The fitted parameters
are γ = 2.38 and kmin = 5 in the main sample and γ = 3.34 and kmin = 4
in the restricted sample. The corresponding Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-values are
0.7139 and 0.9999. These results strongly support the hypothesis that the data
have a power-law tail.24
To test whether the observed skewness in the degree distribution can be
explained by differences in investors’ time of joining, I also fit similar powerlaw models to subsamples consisting of investors who joined during the same
year. The number of people sponsored by sponsor i in year t is given as the
number of investors who joined Wincapita in year t and identified sponsor i as
their sponsor. The power-law relationship exists also in these subsamples from
the six years between 2003 and 2008. The lowest p-value is 0.45 in 2004, and
the average is 0.86. The average γ from the models is 2.59.
The findings indicate that a power-law model clearly provides a better characterization of the sponsoring network compared to a random graph model, and
the diffusion pattern is consistent with an underlying scale-free social network
among investors.
C. The Actual Wincapita Network Compared to a Simulated Network
How different would the diffusion process look if the sponsoring distribution followed a Poisson model instead of the power law? I compare the actual
Wincapita network shown in Figure 2 to a simulated random network with a
Poisson distribution for the number of sponsored investors. I form the simulated network so that the first sponsor is the originator of the scheme and each
newly sponsored investor is a sponsor himself with probability p. The number
of new investors sponsored by each sponsor is drawn from a Poisson distribution with mean λ. The probability p is equal to the percentage of sponsors in the
actual Wincapita network and λ is the average number of sponsored investors
among sponsors. I continue adding nodes until the simulated network has the
same number of nodes as the actual network.25 The only difference between the
actual and the simulated networks is the distribution of the number of sponsored investors. Both networks have the same probability of being a sponsor
(p) and the same average number of investors sponsored by a sponsor (λ).
23 More specifically, I use the power.law.fit function of package igraph in R programming language. The function is run with the default plfit implementation, which finds the optimal values for
kmin and γ using the method of Clauset, Shalizi, and Newman (2009). The reason the parameter
kmin is used in empirical power-law distribution fitting is that most observed real-world power-law
distributions follow the power law closely only after some threshold level (Newman (2005)).
24 Note that small p-values (e.g., less than 0.05) indicate that the test rejects the hypothesis
that the original data could have been drawn from the fitted power-law distribution.
25 If the simulation ends up in a stage where the network ceases to grow, because the most
recently joined investors have not sponsored anyone, I draw another realization of Bernoulli trials
with probability p for the investors who joined in the latest period (i.e., the investors who have the
longest network distance to the originator).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2369

Table III

The Actual Wincapita Network Compared to a Simulated Random
Network
This table compares the actual Wincapita network to a simulated random network that has the
same number of nodes. In the simulated network, the distribution of the number of sponsored
people among sponsors follows a Poisson distribution. The mean of the Poisson distribution is equal
to the corresponding mean in the actual Wincapita network. The simulated network is formed so
that the first sponsor is the originator of the scheme and each newly sponsored investor is a sponsor
himself with probability p, which is equal to the percentage of sponsors in the actual network. The
number of new investors sponsored by each sponsor is drawn from the Poisson distribution. New
nodes are added until the simulated network has the same number of nodes as the actual network.
The only difference between the actual and the simulated networks is the shape of the distribution
of the number of sponsored people. The reported statistics include the maximum network distance
required to reach the originator of the scheme, the number of investors within different network
distance intervals relative to the originator of the scheme, and the average network distance to
the originator of the scheme among all investors. Statistics for the simulated network are based
on 10,000 simulation rounds, and mean values, percentiles, and standard deviations are reported
for each statistic
Simulated Network (Statistics Based on
10,000 Simulation Rounds)
Actual
Network
Network Distance Required to
Reach All Investors
Number of Investors with a
Network Distance 0 to 5 to the
Originator
Number of Investors with a
Network Distance 0 to 10 to the
Originator
Number of Investors with a
Network Distance 0 to 15 to the
Originator
Average Network Distance to the
Originator

Mean

SD

p25

p50

p75

15

161

75

102

154

213

764

58

38

32

46

71

4,177

136

99

72

105

163

4,774

235

186

121

173

180

8.0

97.4

39.4

66.0

93.8

125.4

The shift from a power-law distribution to a Poisson distribution has a dramatic effect on how the number of investors grows as a function of network
distance to the originator of the scheme. Table III provides summary statistics comparing the actual network to the simulated random network based on
10,000 simulation rounds. In the actual Wincapita network, all investors are
within 15 steps of the originator of the scheme, whereas in the simulated network, it takes an average of 161 steps to reach the same number of investors.
Similarly, in the Wincapita network, 4,177 investors have a network distance
of 10 steps or fewer to Hannu Kailajärvi, whereas in the simulated network, an
average of only 136 investors are within the same distance. Internet Appendix
Figure IA.1 provides a network graph based on the simulated network and the
contrast to the actual network is clearly visible.

2370

The Journal of FinanceR

I also analyze how the observed network structure can contribute to the
survival of Ponzi schemes. Ponzi schemes need a constant flow of money from
new investors to finance payouts to existing investors. Because investors can be
reached through fewer social steps in a scale-free network, the network topology
can allow socially diffusing Ponzi schemes to maintain a higher payout ratio
without running out of money. I calibrate a simple Ponzi scheme model to the
actual Wincapita network and the simulated random networks to analyze this
phenomenon. In the model, the Ponzi scheme grows step by step through the
network, starting from the originator of the scheme. At t1, the people who are
directly connected to the originator join the scheme, and at t2 , the people who
are connected to them join, and so on until all of the investors in the network
have joined. All investors remain in the scheme once they have joined, and thus
there are no exits in the model.
I assume that each investor pays the same invested amount I at the time
of joining and makes no further investments. Each period, the scheme pays
the same fixed payment P calculated as a percentage of I to those investors
who were members of the scheme at the end of the previous period. I calculate
the highest value P the scheme can pay investors so that the scheme does not
have a negative cash balance once it has covered the whole network. In other
words, I calculate the highest payout the scheme can afford while remaining
operational. Investors who joined in the last period will receive one payment
of P.
I find that the actual network can sustain a payout ratio that is more than
five times as high as the highest possible payout ratio in the average simulated
network. The highest possible P for the actual Wincapita network is 0.125,
while the average value for the simulated networks is 0.024. Taken together,
the simulation results demonstrate that the observed network topology can
contribute to the growth and survival of Ponzi schemes.

D. Implications of the Scale-Free Connectivity Structure
The scale-free network literature offers a formal explanation for why information spreads significantly faster in networks that have a power-law degree
distribution. Because of the power law, the structure of all scale-free networks
is dominated by a few highly connected hubs, and by construction, scale-free
networks have very short average node-to-node distances (Cohen and Havlin
(2003)). Furthermore, models in network epidemiology show that epidemics
spread through scale-free networks at a much faster rate than in random
spreading models where each infective individual is equally likely to spread the
epidemic (Pastor-Satorras and Vespignani (2001), Barthélemy et al. (2004)). An
epidemic starting at a random point in any scale-free network will quickly reach
a highly connected hub, and in the next stage, the hub will infect a large number of nodes. In other words, investors with many social connections facilitate
the diffusion of an epidemic because their large number of social connections
means that they are more likely to be infected early, and once they are infected,

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2371

Table IV

The Relationship between Network Distance and the Number of
Sponsored Investors
This table reports how the number of sponsored investors varies as a function of network distance.
Network distance is calculated as the number sponsors between investor i and the originator of
the scheme (Hannu Kailajärvi) in the sponsoring network. Panel A reports statistics based on fixed
network distance intervals of four units and Panel B reports statistics based on network distance
quartiles. The quartiles are formed by sorting all investors into groups based on their network
distance. Reported statistics for each interval include the number of observations, the percentage
of sponsors among the investors, the average number of sponsored people per investor, and the
average number of sponsored people per sponsor
Panel A: Network Distance and the Number of Sponsored Investors Based on Fixed Network
Distance Intervals
Network Distance Range
Observations
% of Sponsors
Average Number of
Sponsored People per
Investor
Average Number of
Sponsored People per
Sponsor

0 to 3
396
25.0
1.576

4 to 7
1,137
28.7
1.425

8 to 11
3,036
23.7
0.809

12 to 15
204
12.3
0.319

6.303

4.969

3.417

2.600

Panel B: Network Distance and the Number of Sponsored Investors Based on Network
Distance Quartiles

Network Distance Range
Observations
% of Sponsors
Average Number of
Sponsored People per
Investor
Average Number of
Sponsored People per
Sponsor

Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

0 to 6
1,001
28.3
1.524

7 to 8
1,250
31.0
1.480

9
1,132
23.1
0.701

10 to 15
1,390
17.1
0.429

5.392

4.780

3.027

2.519

they will spread the epidemic to a large number of people who are within one
social step in the network.
In line with this idea, while most investors in the Wincapita network are
directly connected only to their sponsor, they are typically only a short network
distance away from a highly connected network hub, which connects them
to a much larger number of people. The average investor in the sponsoring
network of Figure 2 is connected to only two other investors, but the number
of people within two steps is 20.5 and the number of people within three steps
is 76.5. These values are much higher than, for example, in a network where
every person has connections to exactly two other investors in addition to their
sponsor.

2372

The Journal of FinanceR

Consistent with the idea that people with many preexisting social connections heard about Wincapita earlier than others, I also find that highly connected nodes are reached in the early stages of the Wincapita epidemic.26
Table IV divides investors into groups based on fixed network distance
intervals and network distance quartiles using the number of sponsors between
the investor and the originator of the scheme as network distance. The average
number of people sponsored by an investor in a group decreases monotonically
with network distance.
Another implication of the scale-free network structure is that even weakly
contagious word-of-mouth epidemics can spread widely in the population. Traditional susceptible-infective-removed type epidemic models, such as those referred to in Shiller’s (2000) famous book, Irrational Exuberance, predict a critical threshold for the propagation of an epidemic throughout a population. If
a disease is less infectious than that epidemic threshold, the epidemic will
die out, whereas epidemics with a spreading rate above the threshold will
multiply exponentially and penetrate the entire system. Pastor-Satorras and
Vespignani (2001) show that in scale-free networks, the epidemic threshold
always converges to zero. In other words, even weakly contagious epidemics
will spread widely and persist in scale-free networks. This well-known property has been used to explain the rapid diffusion and persistence of sexually
transmitted diseases and computer viruses (Barabási (2009)).27
In the financial economics context, the scale-free epidemic model explains
how socially transmitted investment ideas can spread rapidly even if the average investor discusses them with only a few other people. It also implies that
the social epidemics characterized by Shiller (2000) do not necessarily require
a high transmission rate to spread extensively, and can arise even if most investors do not distribute information further. Thus, any policy campaign aimed
at starting or stopping an epidemic of this kind should focus on identifying the
highly connected hubs that play a vital role in the network’s connectivity—a
scale-free communication network is resilient to random removal of nodes, but
collapses quickly if the hubs are removed (Albert, Jeong, and Barabási (2000)).
One may ask to what extent the network topology findings of this paper
generalize to other settings. While Wincapita participants may differ from
typical retail investors in many respects, a growing body of literature shows
that social networks are structurally similar across many different cultural and
sociodemographic groups around the world. At least on this basis, there is no
obvious reason to believe that the social connections of Wincapita participants
are fundamentally different from the connections among other people.

26 A counterfactual scenario could be, for example, that the power law exists in the data for a
reason that is completely unrelated to underlying social connections. Under such a scenario, the
number of connections can be independent of network distance.
27 This follows from the empirical observation that human sexual contacts and computer networks also have a scale-free network structure (Barabási (2009)).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2373

Figure 5. Network distance and the cumulative number of investors. This figure provides
graphs depicting the cumulative number of investors at different network distances. Network
distance captures the number of sponsors between an investor and the originator of the Wincapita
scheme (Hannu Kailajärvi) in the sponsoring network. The structure of the network is shown
in Figure 2. The graphs are based on investors for whom the chain of sponsors can be traced
continuously to the originator of the scheme. The upper graph is based on all sample investors and
the lower graph is based on investors whose year of joining is known. The lower graph includes
separate curves based on subsamples of investors who joined Wincapita during 2003 to 2006 and
2007 to 2008.

E. Network Distance and the Diffusion Dynamics of Wincapita
I next use the Wincapita network to characterize how the aggregate number
of investors affected by an investment idea grows as a function of social distance
from the originator of the idea. This analysis provides insights into the diffusion
dynamics of word-of-mouth information within social networks.
Figure 5 provides a graph depicting the cumulative number of investors in
Wincapita as a function of network distance. The curve shows how the size of the
scheme grows if it starts at Hannu Kailajärvi and spreads across the network
depicted in Figure 2 one step at a time. The curve is S-shaped, indicating that
the diffusion of information progresses in a nonlinear fashion. The median

The Journal of FinanceR

2374

distance to Kailajärvi is eight steps, with the growth rate slowing down after
nine steps. Other graphs in Figure 2 indicate that the S-curve also exists in
subsamples consisting of investors who joined during different time periods.
Internet Appendix Figure IA.2 shows that a similar pattern does not exist in
the simulated random network described in Section II.C.
The S-shaped curve is interesting, as it is in line with the predictions of
epidemic models of investor behavior proposed by Shiller and Pound (1989),
Shiller (2000), and Shive (2010). In these models, the number of people affected
by an idea or behavior grows approximately exponentially in the early stages of
the social epidemic. The growth rate then slows down over time because there
are fewer people left who are willing to adopt the idea but have not already done
so. These models therefore imply an S-shaped pattern in information diffusion.
There are at least two potential explanations for why the growth rate of Wincapita slows down after a relatively low number of social steps. One possibility
is that investors who are late joiners find it more difficult to recruit new investors because the subset of their friends who would be potentially interested
in the scheme have already joined. The scale-free epidemic literature offers a
second, complementary network theory-based explanation. If social networks
are scale-free, late joiners are more likely to have few social connections and
fewer potential friends to invite.
III. Investor Characteristics and the Diffusion of Wincapita
In this section, I study the role of personal characteristics in the spreading of Wincapita. I analyze how sponsors differ from other investors and I
also study differences and similarities in personal characteristics within the
sponsor-sponsored investor pairs.
A. Who Are the Sponsors?
Table V provides statistics on the personal characteristics of sponsors compared to nonsponsors. Sponsors have on average higher taxable income than
nonsponsors, and they are more likely to be male. The difference in average annual income is €7,400 and the percentage of females is nine percentage points
lower than among nonsponsors. For legal reasons, I cannot provide detailed personal information about the most active sponsors, but the statistics show that
they are also typically male on a high income. Based on the police interviews,
most of them have an occupation or position that puts them in contact with a
large number of people on a daily basis. Examples include business-to-business
sales representatives, corporate managers, and people who are active within
religious communities. This is consistent with the idea that people with a large
preexisting social network were the most powerful spreaders of Wincapita.
B. How Do the Investors Differ from Their Sponsors?
Table VI reports statistics on relative differences in personal characteristics

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2375

Table V

Personal Characteristics of Sponsors Compared to Nonsponsors
This table compares Wincapita sponsors to nonsponsors based on personal characteristics. The
table also reports statistics for subsamples of sponsors who sponsored at least 10, 20, or 30 people.
The reported statistics are average and median age (calculated at the end of 2007), average and
median taxable income (thousands of euros), the percentage of females, the percentage of people
with higher than mandatory basic education, and the percentage of people with higher education
(bachelor’s degree or higher). The income statistics are based on taxable income in 2017. Statistics
are based on investors who were personally interviewed by police. The table also reports simulationbased p-values for the difference between sponsors and nonsponsors. The two-sided p-value is
based on a simulation where the same number of sponsors is selected randomly among all sample
investors. It measures the probability that the difference between randomly assigned sponsors and
nonsponsors is at least as large as the empirically observed difference based on 1,000 simulation
rounds
Panel A: Nonsponsors Compared to Sponsors

Observations
Median Age
Average Age
Median Income
(Thousands of Euros)
Average Income
(Thousands of Euros)
% of Females
% with Higher than
Mandatory Education
% with Higher Education

Nonsponsors

Sponsors

Simulation-Based p-Value
for the Difference

2,530
47
46.4
32.8

858
45
45.0
35.2

0.076
0.005
0.015

45.7

53.1

0.017

21.3
86.6

12.4
88.8

0.000
0.118

38.1

37.2

0.649

Panel B: Statistics for the Most Active Sponsors

Observations
Median Age
Average Age
Median Income
(Thousands of Euros)
Average Income
(Thousands of Euros)
% of Females
% with Higher than
Mandatory Education
% with Higher Education

Sponsors Who
Sponsored at
Least 10 People

Sponsors Who
Sponsored at
Least 20 People

Sponsors Who
Sponsored at
Least 30 People

92
48
47.8
52.0

33
48
49.3
116.5

13
56
53.9
127.4

113.1

194.0

259.7

12.0
81.3

9.1
74.1

0.0
75.0

33.3

25.9

33.3

between sponsors and their sponsored investors. The sponsor has comparatively higher income in 64% of sponsor-sponsored investor pairs, is older in
51% of the pairs, and is of same gender in 81% of the pairs. The sponsor’s education level is comparatively higher in 21% of investor pairs and lower in 26%

2376

The Journal of FinanceR
Table VI

Sponsors Compared to Their Sponsored Investors
This table compares sponsors to their sponsored investors based on personal characteristics and
geographic location. The reported statistics are based on all sponsor-sponsored investor pairs
where the measured statistic is available for both investors. Panel A reports statistics based on
age, income, and geographic distance. Age is measured at the end of 2007 and income is the person’s
taxable income in 2007. Relative age differences are based on the year of birth. Geographic distance
is calculated based on the street addresses reported in the police interview. Panel B reports the
percentage of observations in which the sponsor is relatively older or younger, has the same gender,
has higher taxable income, and has a relatively lower or higher education level
Panel A: Statistics Comparing Investors to Their Sponsors Based on Age, Income, and Location

Sponsor’s Age Minus Investor’s Age
Sponsor’s Income Minus Investor’s Income
Geographic Distance (Kilometers)

p25

p50

p75

Average

Std. Dev.

N

−6
−10
4.4

1
9.5
16.1

9
73.1
80.5

1.4
65
76.4

13.8
187.8
130.4

2,013
1,682
2,057

Panel B: Statistics on Sponsoring Relationships
Sponsor Is Older
Sponsor Is Born in the Same Year
Sponsor Is Younger
Sponsor Is of Same Gender
Sponsor Has Relatively Higher Income
Sponsor Has Relatively Higher Education Level
Sponsor Has the Same Education Level
Sponsor Has Relatively Lower Education Level

51.20%
5.40%
43.40%
80.70%
64.00%
21.40%
52.70%
25.90%

of investor pairs. Average geographic distance between an investor and their
sponsor is 76 km, with a median distance of 16 km. Internet Appendix Section
VI provides further analysis of these differences and, using a simulation that
accounts for the network topology, shows that the differences in income and
age are statistically significant.
On average, most investors resemble their sponsor in terms of personal
characteristics. Table VII reports pairwise Pearson correlations in personal
characteristics between an investor and a person who is connected to him
through the sponsorship chain and n steps closer to the originator of the
scheme. The correlation coefficients show that the similarity extends to
people who are within two steps in the social network. While this finding
is not very surprising, the homophily in social interactions is nevertheless
relevant for explaining differences in investment behavior across social and
demographic groups. Word-of-mouth communication that takes place mainly
within homogeneous social groups, rather than across them, can strengthen
homogeneity in economic behavior within the groups (Granovetter (2005)) and
preclude or slow down the convergence of behaviors in the population (Golub
and Jackson (2012)). It can also facilitate the diffusion of new ideas within
social groups in which members share characteristics that make a particular
idea more attractive to them (Jackson (2014)).

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2377

Table VII

Correlation in Personal Characteristics as a Function of Network
Distance
This table shows how correlation in personal characteristics within the Wincapita network varies
as a function of social network distance. The correlation coefficients are calculated based on investor
pairs where each investor i is linked to another investor j who joined the scheme before i and is
part of the chain of sponsors that connects i to the originator of the scheme. Network distance is
the number of sponsors between i and j in the network. For example, an investor who has network
distance zero to investor i is his sponsor, and investor who has network distance one to investor
i is his sponsor’s sponsor. The table reports pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients, which are
calculated based on all investor pairs with nonmissing values for the data item. With continuous
variables (age and income), I exclude the highest and lowest 1% of values in the sample to limit the
effect of outliers. The variables measuring personal characteristics include age (at the end of 2007),
education (a binary variable that takes the value 1 if the individual has higher than secondary
education), gender (a binary variable that takes the value 1 if the individual is female), and income,
which measures taxable income for year 2007. p-Values for each coefficient are reported below the
coefficient value.
Network Distance
Age
Coefficient
p-Value
Education
Coefficient
p-Value
Gender
Coefficient
p-Value
Income
Coefficient
p-Value
** , ** ,

0

1

2

3

4

0.3287***
0.0000

0.1580***
0.0000

−0.0147
0.5495

−0.0897***
0.0002

−0.0472*
0.0677

0.2510***
0.0000

0.1251***
0.0001

−0.0167
0.5746

−0.0207
0.4904

−0.0049
0.8860

0.1898***
0.0000

0.0519***
0.0037

0.0158
0.4055

0.0244
0.2111

−0.0142
0.4894

0.0600**
0.0269

0.0307
0.3380

0.0526*
0.0981

−0.0742**
0.0418

−0.0453
0.1666

and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

IV. Sponsoring Relationships and Invested Amounts
Next, I study how social connections within the scheme are related to
the investment behavior of individual investors. I capture investors’ willingness to invest in Wincapita as the total amount of money they invested
in the scheme over its existence divided by their annual income. In all of
the analyses, I exclude the highest and lowest 5% of these scaled invested
amounts to ensure that the findings are not driven by extreme tails of the
distribution.28

28 As before, annual income is based on year 2007. The exclusion of the 5% tails sets the range of
the scaled invested amounts between 0.03 and 1.35. For comparison, the lowest value in the data
is 0.005 and the highest value is 18.19.

2378

The Journal of FinanceR

A. Do Sponsors Invest More than Nonsponsors?
I start by comparing sponsors’ invested amounts to nonsponsors’ invested
amounts. This comparison reveals whether investors who invited others put
their own money where their mouth is. Based on the invested amount as a percentage of annual income, the median sponsor invests over 50% more compared
to the median nonsponsor. The median value among nonsponsors is 0.20 and
the average is 0.35, while among sponsors, the median is 0.31 and the average
is 0.48 (t-value for the difference is 7.79).29
Why do investors who sponsor others invest more? The simplest explanation
is that investors who are most enthusiastic about Wincapita both invest more
and are more likely to tell others about the scheme. Another explanation may be
related to social utility (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004), Bursztyn et al. (2014)):
the sponsors successfully convinced others to join and investors may derive
utility from investing in the same asset as their peers due to, for example, the
possibility of discussing the investment with their friends or relative wealth
concerns.
Ponzi schemes require a steady flow of funds from new or existing investors
to stay alive, and investors who both invite others and personally invest more
can potentially contribute to the scheme’s survival, particularly in the early
stages. Using the model described in Section II.C, Internet Appendix Section
VII examines how the higher net investments of sponsors can contribute to the
sustainable payout ratio of the Ponzi scheme. A calibration exercise suggests
that the highest possible payout ratio of the Wincapita network increases over
five times as much as the highest possible payout ratio of the simulated random
network when compared to a situation in which sponsors and nonsponsors
make the same investment.30 The scale-free network topology amplifies this
effect, as there are fewer payment periods after the initial investment.
B. Sponsors’ Personal Characteristics and Investment Decisions
Next, I study how Wincapita members’ investment decisions are related to
the personal characteristics of their sponsors. Here, I focus primarily on the
effect of relative differences in personal characteristics because social interactions typically occur among people who are similar (McPherson, Smith-Lovin,
and Cook (2001)). Characteristics that are statistically related to invested

29 The difference between sponsors and nonsponsors exists even if the investors who withdrew
money from Wincapita are excluded. In this case, the median is 0.21 for nonsponsors and 0.32 for
sponsors, with the t-value for the difference in means equal to 6.08. Internet Appendix Section
VII shows that the difference between sponsors and nonsponsors is also statistically significant
in regressions that control for personal characteristics and in regressions that explain invested
amounts net of withdrawals instead of total invested amounts.
30 In the actual Wincapita network, the ratio increases by 0.0083 from 0.1253 to 0.1336. In the
simulated random network, it increases on average by 0.0016 from 0.0241 to 0.0257. These findings
indicate a 7% increase relative to the situation in which sponsors and nonsponsors make the same
investment.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2379

amounts can provide insights into the economic motivations for following peers’
advice in investment decisions.
The existence of peer effects in investment decisions is well documented
(Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004), Brown et al. (2008), Kaustia and Knüpfer
(2012)), but little is known about the personal characteristics of influencers. A
field experiment by Bursztyn et al. (2014) shows that investors are particularly
likely to imitate a financially sophisticated peer. Although most studies find
that investors have a tendency to imitate peers, Beshears et al. (2015) find
that upward social comparisons can discourage people from investing based on
peers’ information.
I run regressions in which the dependent variable is the invested amount
divided by annual income. I measure the effect of the sponsor’s personal characteristics using dummy variables for investors whose sponsor has relatively
higher income, whose sponsor is older, whose sponsor is of the same gender,
whose sponsor has comparatively higher education, and whose sponsor has
comparatively lower education. The education level is based on the three categories defined earlier. I also run specifications that include log(distance to
sponsor in kilometers) as an additional variable. All of the regressions include taxable income, taxable income squared, age, age squared, a dummy for
females, a dummy for entrepreneurs, dummies for the two highest educationlevel categories, dummies for the investor’s year of joining, and a dummy for
sponsors as control variables. The squared values for age and income control
for possible nonlinear effects.
I run these regressions with and without sponsor fixed effects. Investors
are not matched randomly with their sponsors, and thus, it is possible that
the personal characteristics of the sponsor are correlated with those of the
people he sponsors. Sponsor fixed effects effectively control for peer group fixed
effects as well as for any joint unobservable characteristics shared by different
investors with the same sponsor. Some sponsors may also be better at selling
the investment idea than others. I cluster standard errors by year the investor
joins the scheme.
The results are reported in Table VIII. As can be seen, investors invest more
if their sponsor has comparatively higher taxable income and age, and the
sponsor’s relative education level also affects invested amounts. In almost all
cases, the coefficients are economically and statistically more significant when
sponsor fixed effects are included. The dummy for investors with a higher
income sponsor is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level in each
specification with coefficients ranging between 0.03 and 0.04 without sponsor
fixed effects and between 0.09 and 0.12 when they are included. The coefficients
with sponsor fixed effects imply an increase of 26% to 52% relative to the median
invested amount. All coefficients on the older sponsor dummy are statistically
significant and positive, and all coefficients on the lower education sponsor
dummy are statistically significant and negative. The coefficient on investors
whose sponsor has comparatively higher education is statistically significant
only when sponsor fixed effects are included. The same-gender dummy and

2380

The Journal of FinanceR
Table VIII

Sponsor’s Personal Characteristics and the Total Amount of Funds
Invested in Wincapita
This table reports results from cross-sectional OLS regressions in which the dependent variable
is the total amount of funds an investor invested in Wincapita divided by his annual income. The
main independent variables measure the investor’s difference relative to his sponsor in terms of
personal characteristics and geographic location. They include separate dummies for investors
whose sponsor has higher taxable income (based on taxable income from 2007), investors whose
sponsor is older, investors whose sponsor has a comparatively higher education level, investors
whose sponsor has a comparatively lower education level, and log(distance to sponsor) measured
in kilometers. The measured education level is based on three categories: investors who have only
mandatory basic education, investors whose highest degree is from an upper secondary school,
and investors who have a higher education degree. The regressions also include a dummy variable
for investors who are sponsors. All regressions include the following unreported control variables:
annual income, annual income squared, a dummy variable for females, age, age squared, a dummy
variable for entrepreneurs, and dummies for the two highest education-level categories defined
earlier. Annual income is the person’s taxable income in 2007 and age is measured at the end of
2007. All regressions include dummies for the investor’s year of joining. Regressions in columns
(4) to (6) include sponsor fixed effects. t-Statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients.
Standard errors are clustered by the year of joining

Sponsor Has Higher Income
Sponsor Is Older
Sponsor Is of Same Gender

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.032
[3.52]
0.032
[2.81]
−0.033
[−0.51]

0.040
[4.23]
0.032
[2.69]
−0.043
[−0.77]
0.008
[0.43]
−0.036
[−4.49]

0.098
[5.46]
0.049
[2.23]
−0.047
[−1.10]

0.121
[6.16]
0.069
[3.80]
−0.052
[−1.13]
0.063
[3.25]
−0.132
[−5.01]

0.124
[9.96]
Yes
No
1,024
0.129

0.126
[6.20]
Yes
No
854
0.131

0.039
[4.21]
0.028
[2.67]
−0.048
[−0.77]
0.008
[0.34]
−0.041
[−6.08]
−0.001
[−0.61]
0.131
[5.64]
Yes
No
821
0.135

0.153
[3.38]
Yes
Yes
768
0.392

0.153
[3.48]
Yes
Yes
645
0.413

0.108
[4.28]
0.075
[4.05]
−0.078
[−1.65]
0.055
[2.47]
−0.130
[−5.05]
0.004
[0.80]
0.163
[3.21]
Yes
Yes
613
0.416

Sponsor Has Higher Education
Sponsor Has Lower Education
Log(Distance to Sponsor)
Sponsor Dummy
Personal Controls
Sponsor Fixed Effects
N
R2

the coefficient on log(geographic distance to sponsor in kilometers) are not
statistically significant.
Internet Appendix Section VIII reports results from additional robustness
checks. The results show that the findings above cannot be explained by observations in which the sponsor and the investor invested the same default
amount or by selection bias among investors who were contacted by the police.
The higher income sponsor dummy is statistically significant even if sponsors who withdrew funds are excluded. The Internet Appendix also shows that

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2381

sponsors’ absolute (as opposed to relative) personal characteristics are not statistically significantly related to the invested amounts.
Age, education, and income are potential sources of personal status and credibility, and the results so far are consistent with the idea that investors invest
more based on the information that comes from a credible and trustworthy
source. A heuristic known as a question substitution may contribute to the
social diffusion of investment mistakes in Wincapita. When faced with a difficult question, people often answer an easier one instead (Kahneman (2011)).
Some investors may have exchanged the more complex question “Do I trust
this investment scheme?” to the simpler question “Do I trust the person who is
telling me about this investment scheme?”
C. Relative Income Differences and Invested Amounts
Next, I study the relationship between income differences and invested
amounts in more detail to better understand whether the sponsor’s income
level is a reference point that influences decision making. I also analyze the
effect of income differences at the neighborhood level.
There are at least two explanations for why investors would pay attention
to the income difference relative to their sponsor when deciding how much
to invest in Wincapita. First, if higher income sponsors are considered more
credible and trustworthy, investors may make judgments about these characteristics relative to their own income level, rather than on an absolute basis.
Second, it is possible that the sponsor’s income level matters because of relative wealth concerns or “keeping up with the Joneses” behavior. Wincapita
was a get-rich-quick scheme and investors may have been worried about losing
compared to their peers if they did not invest similarly, which could have induced lower income investors to invest more. The finding that investors invest
more relative to their own income when their sponsor has comparatively higher
income is consistent with “keeping up with the Joneses.”
Previous studies show that relative wealth concerns can influence the investment decisions of retail investors. In a field experiment by Bursztyn et al.
(2014), most participants who invest in the same asset as their peers mention relative return or consumption concerns as a motivating factor for their
decision. Hong et al. (2014) find that local status concerns affect individual
investors’ trading and risk-taking. Prior evidence further shows that relative
income differences affect behavior at the neighborhood level. For instance,
Luttmer (2005) finds that neighbors’ relatively higher earnings are associated
with lower levels of self-reported happiness and Kumar (2009) finds that investors who earn less than their neighbors invest more in lottery-type stocks.
If peers’ wealth or income is a reference point in decision making, the
marginal effect of the income difference should be strongest when the sponsor’s income is close to the investor’s own income. Figure 6 illustrates three
hypothetical scenarios on the relationship between income differences and invested amounts. In these graphs, the sponsor’s annual income minus the investor’s own income is plotted on the horizontal axis and the investor’s invested

2382

The Journal of FinanceR

Figure 6. Hypothetical scenarios on the relationship between invested amounts and
relative income differences. This figure depicts three hypothetical scenarios on the relationship
between investors’ invested amounts and the income difference relative to the sponsor. Each graph
plots the sponsor’s income minus the investor’s own income on the horizontal axis and the investor’s
invested amount divided by his annual income on the vertical axis. The dashed line depicts the
relationship between the two variables. The two axes meet at the origin, where the investor’s income
is equal to the sponsor’s income. In Panel A, the invested amounts and the income differences are
unrelated. In Panel B, the invested amounts increase monotonically with the income difference,
but there is no discontinuity around point zero. In Panel C, the sponsor’s income is a reference
point that affects decision making. The invested amounts increase with the income difference,
but there is a strong discontinuity around the point where the sponsor’s income is equal to the
investor’s own income.

amount divided by annual income is plotted on the vertical axis. If there is no
correlation between the two variables, the graph is flat. If the invested amount
increases with the sponsor’s relative income, the graph is monotonically increasing. Moreover, if the sponsor’s income is a reference point, there should
be discontinuity around the point where the investor’s income is equal to the
sponsor’s income.
To examine this relationship empirically, I first sort investors into deciles
based on the sponsor’s annual income minus the investor’s own annual income.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2383

Figure 7. The relationship between income difference relative to the sponsor and Wincapita investments. This figure shows how individual investors’ invested amounts in Wincapita
as a percentage of annual income vary with the relative difference in taxable income between an
investor and his sponsor. The figure is based on a regression in which the dependent variable is
the total amount of funds an investor transferred into Wincapita divided by his annual taxable
income. The explanatory variables are dummies for the top nine deciles of the sponsor’s taxable
income minus the investor’s own taxable income. The omitted category is the first decile where
the sponsor’s income minus own income has the lowest values. The regression includes dummies
for investors’ year of joining and sponsor fixed effects. The observations consist of all investors in
Wincapita for whom the data are available. In the figure, each dot combines a coefficient value
(measured on the vertical axis) with the corresponding decile value (measured on the horizontal
axis) and the individual dots are connected with a line. The gray area shows the 95% confidence
interval for the coefficients based on standard errors clustered by the year of joining. All taxable
income values are based on taxable income in 2007.

I then run a regression explaining total invested amount divided by annual
income with dummies for the top nine deciles. The regression includes year
of joining dummies and sponsor fixed effects. Figure 7 shows how the decile
dummy coefficients vary and includes confidence intervals. The horizontal axis
plots the sponsor’s income minus own income and the vertical axis measures
the coefficient value. All coefficients show the difference relative to the first
decile, which is the omitted category.
The shape of the curve is consistent with the hypothesis that the sponsor’s
income is a reference point. The marginal effect of the income difference is
higher around the point where the sponsor’s income is equal to the investor’s
own income. The marginal increase is highest just above zero in the area
between the fifth decile (€900) and the sixth decile (€9,450). The coefficients do

2384

The Journal of FinanceR

Figure 8. The relationship between sponsor’s income and Wincapita investments. This
figure shows how individual investors’ invested amounts in Wincapita as a percentage of annual
income vary with their sponsor’s annual income. The figure is based on a regression in which the
dependent variable is the total amount of funds an investor transferred into Wincapita divided by
his annual taxable income. The main explanatory variables are dummies for the top nine deciles
of the sponsor’s income. The omitted category is the first decile where the sponsor’s income has the
lowest values. The regression includes dummies for investors’ year of joining. The observations
consist of all investors in Wincapita for whom the data are available. Each dot combines a coefficient
value (shown on the vertical axis) with the corresponding decile value (show on the horizontal axis)
and the individual dots are connected with a line. The gray area shows the 95% confidence interval
for the coefficients based on standard errors clustered by the year of joining. All taxable income
values are based on taxable income in 2007.

not increase monotonically with the income difference, and deciles 9 and 10 are
below the peak. The coefficients for deciles 4 to 9 are statistically significant at
the 1% level and the coefficient for decile 10 is significant at the 10% level.
I also test whether the absolute income of the sponsor is related to invested
amounts. To do so, I sort investors into deciles based on their sponsor’s taxable
income and run a similar regression as above. The only difference is that
I cannot include sponsor fixed effects because they would overlap with the
sponsor’s income. Figure 8 shows that none of the decile dummies is statistically
significant, and there is no trend in the coefficients. The contrast between the
two figures suggests that the sponsor’s relative, rather than absolute, income
affects investment decisions.
I next analyze whether relative income differences also matter at the neighborhood level, as shown by Kumar (2009). I run regressions explaining total
invested amount divided by annual income using a dummy variable for in-

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2385

vestors whose income is below the median income in their postal code area.31
The regressions include sponsor fixed effects and the same investor-level control variables used in Table VIII. Some specifications additionally include the
median income of the postal code area to control for the possibility that it is
related to the invested amount.
Table IX reports the results. The dummy for investors whose income is below the median income in the postal code area is statistically significant and
positive with coefficient values ranging between 0.07 and 0.10. These findings
suggest that, all else being equal, investors who earn less than their neighbors
invest more in Wincapita. The median income level of the postal code area is
not statistically significant in any specification.
Taken together, the above results indicate that Wincapita participants’ investment decisions are influenced by relative income differences. This finding
can be explained by social learning whereby peers’ credibility is assessed relative to the investor’s own income level, or by relative wealth concerns. If
“keeping up with the Joneses” behavior plays an important role here, the investment decisions of the Ponzi scheme participants may not be driven solely
by expectations of unusually high returns, but also by the fear of losing relative
to peers.
V. Conclusion
The Wincapita investigation documents provide information about the process through which investment ideas spread from one person to the next. The
analyses of this paper show that this process cannot be characterized by models of information diffusion whereby investment ideas are transmitted evenly
from one investor to a fixed number of peers. Instead, a small fraction of investors is responsible for most of the observed social effect, while most investors are passive information receivers who adopt the idea but do not spread
it further. These findings suggest that social network structures play an important role in the diffusion of investment ideas with a few powerful individuals that have many social connections significantly facilitating the diffusion
process.
The observations of this paper also contribute to the discussion on the benefits
and harms of peer effects in financial decision making. Although investors’
social learning can produce welfare-improving outcomes in many situations,
for example, through higher stock market participation and better portfolio
diversification, the evidence of this paper indicates that it can also spread and
exacerbate investment mistakes.
Initial submission: June 23, 2017; Accepted: September 3, 2018
Editors: Stefan Nagel, Philip Bond, Amit Seru, and Wei Xiong
31 Postal code income data are from the same year as investors’ income data. Based on 2014
statistics of Statistics Finland, the median Finnish postal code area has a population of 474, with
an average of 1,781.

2386

The Journal of FinanceR
Table IX

Income Difference Relative to the Postal Code Median and the Total
Amount of Funds Invested in Wincapita
This table reports results from cross-sectional OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is
the total amount of funds an investor has invested in Wincapita divided by his annual income. The
main independent variable is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the investor’s taxable income is
below the median taxable income in the postal code area of his home. Other reported independent
variables are the median income in the postal code area in thousands of euros and dummies for
investors whose sponsor has higher taxable income (based on taxable income from 2007), investors
whose sponsor is older, investors whose sponsor has a comparatively higher education level, investors whose sponsor has a comparatively lower education level, and a dummy for investors who
are sponsors. The measured education level is based on three categories: investors who have only
mandatory basic education, investors whose highest degree is from an upper secondary school, and
investors who have a higher education degree. All regressions also include the following unreported
control variables: annual income, annual income squared, a dummy variable for females, age, age
squared, a dummy variable for entrepreneurs, and dummies for the two highest education-level
categories defined earlier. Annual income is the person’s taxable income in 2007 and age is measured at the end of 2007. All regressions include dummies for the investor’s year of joining, and
sponsor fixed effects. t-Statistics are reported in brackets below the coefficients. Standard errors
are clustered by year of joining

Investor’s Income Is Below the Postal
Code Area Median Income
Median Income in the Postal Code Area
(Thousands of Euros)
Sponsor Has Higher Income

(1)

(2)

0.089
[3.07]

0.096
[2.95]
−0.003
[−1.25]

Sponsor Is Older
Sponsor Is of Same Gender
Sponsor Has Higher Education
Sponsor Has Lower Education
Sponsor Dummy
Personal Controls
Sponsor Fixed Effects
N
R2

0.140
[6.62]
Yes
Yes
1,407
0.424

0.140
[6.64]
Yes
Yes
1,407
0.425

(3)
0.070
[2.46]

0.115
[5.82]
0.070
[4.46]
−0.065
[−1.36]
0.067
[3.70]
−0.126
[−4.78]
0.155
[3.80]
Yes
Yes
645
0.418

(4)
0.072
[2.54]
−0.001
[−0.38]
0.114
[5.79]
0.070
[4.46]
−0.064
[−1.33]
0.067
[3.68]
−0.126
[−4.68]
0.155
[3.82]
Yes
Yes
645
0.418

REFERENCES
Ahern, Kenneth R., 2017, Information networks: Evidence from illegal trading tips, Journal of
Financial Economics 125, 26–47.
Albert, Réka, Hawoong Jeong, and Albert-László Barabási, 2000, Error and attack tolerance of
complex networks, Nature 406, 47–97.
Andrei, Daniel, and Julien Cujean, 2017, Information percolation, momentum, and reversal, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 617–645.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2387

Banerjee, Abhijit, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson, 2014, Gossip:
Identifying central individuals in a social network, NBER Working paper 20422.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Drew Fudenberg, 2004, Word-of-mouth learning, Games and Economic
Behavior 46, 1–22.
Barabási, Albert-László, 2002, Linked: The New Science of Networks (Perseus Publishing, Cambridge, MA).
Barabási, Albert-László, 2009, Scale-free networks: A decade and beyond, Science 325, 412–413.
Barabási, Albert-László, and Réka Albert, 1999, Emergence of scaling in random networks, Science
286, 509–512.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261–292.
Barthélemy, Marc, Alain Barrat, Romulado Pastor-Satorras, and Alessandro Vespignani, 2004,
Velocity and hierarchical spread of epidemic outbreaks in scale-free networks, Physical Review
Letters 92, 178701.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 2007, Heuristics and biases in retirement savings behavior, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 81–104.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Katherine L. Milkman,
2015, The effect of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions, Journal of
Finance 70, 1161–1201.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Zoran Ivković, Paul A. Smith, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2008, Neighbors matter: Causal community effects and stock market participation, Journal of Finance 63, 1509–
1531.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman, and Noam Yuchtman, 2014, Understanding
mechanisms underlying peer effects: Evidence from a field experiment on financial decisions,
Econometrica 82, 1273–1301.
Cao, H. Henry, Bing Han, and David Hirshleifer, 2011, Taking the road less traveled by: Does
conversation eradicate pernicious cascades? Journal of Economic Theory 146, 1418–1436.
Clauset, Aaron, Cosma R. Shalizi, and Mark E. J. Newman, 2009, Power-law distributions in
empirical data, SIAM Review 51, 661–703.
Cohen, Reuven, and Shlomo Havlin, 2003, Scale-free networks are ultrasmall, Physical Review
Letters 90, 058701.
Cooper, Arnold C., Carolyn Y. Woo, and William C. Dunkelberg, 1988, Entrepreneurs’ perceived
chances for success, Journal of Business Venturing 3, 97–108.
Deason, Stephen, Shivaram Rajgopal, and Gregory Waymire, 2015, Who gets swindled in Ponzi
Schemes? Working paper, Emory University and Columbia University.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, 2002, Participation and investment decisions in a retirement
plan: The influence of colleagues’ choices, Journal of Public Economics 85, 121–148.
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez, 2003, The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment, Quarterly Journal of Economics
118, 815–842.
Ellison, Glenn, and Drew Fudenberg, 1995, Word-of-mouth communication and social learning,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 93–125.
Erdős, Paul, and Alfréd Rényi, 1959, On random graphs, Publicationes Mathematicae 6, 290–297.
Feick, Lawrence F., and Linda L. Price, 1987, The market maven: A diffuser of marketplace
information, Journal of Marketing 51, 83–97.
Fruchterman, Thomas M. J., and Edward M. Reingold, 1991, Graph drawing by force-directed
placement, Software - Practice and Experience 21, 1129–1164.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2009, Power laws in economics and finance, Annual Review of Economics 1, 255–
293.
Galeotti, Andrea, and Sanjeev Goyal, 2010, The law of the few, American Economic Review 100,
1468–1492.
Golub, Benjamin, and Matthew O. Jackson, 2012, How homophily affects the speed of learning
and best-response dynamics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1287–1338.
Granovetter, Mark, 2005, The impact of social structure on economic outcomes, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 33–50.

2388

The Journal of FinanceR

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2009, Sensation seeking, overconfidence, and trading activity, Journal of Finance 64, 549–578.
Gurun, Umit G., Noah Stoffman, and Scott E. Yonker, 2018, Trust busting: The effect of fraud on
investor behavior, Review of Financial Studies 31, 1341–1376.
Han, Bing, and David Hirshleifer, 2013, Self-enhancing transmission bias and active investing,
Working paper, University of Toronto and University of California, Irvine.
Han, Bing, and Liyan Yang, 2013, Social networks, information acquisition, and asset prices,
Management Science 59, 1444–1457.
Hirshleifer, David, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Thought and behavior contagion in capital markets,
in Thorsten Hens and Klaus Reiner Schenk-Hoppé, eds.: Handbook of Financial Markets:
Dynamics and Evolution (Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Hong, Harrison, Wenxi Jiang, Na Wang, and Bin Zhao, 2014, Trading for status, Review of Financial
Studies 27, 3171–3212.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004, Social interaction and stock-market
participation, Journal of Finance 59, 137–163.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2005, Thy neighbor’s portfolio: Word-ofmouth effects in the holdings and trades of money managers, Journal of Finance 60, 2801–
2824.
Hvide, Hans K., and Per Östberg, 2015, Social interaction at work, Journal of Financial Economics
117, 628–652.
Ivković, Zoran, and Scott J. Weisbenner, 2007, Information diffusion effects in individual investors’
common stock purchases: Covet thy neighbors’ investment choices, Review of Financial Studies
20, 1327–1357.
Iyer, Rajkamal, and Manju Puri, 2012, Understanding bank runs: The importance of depositorbank relationships and networks, American Economic Review 102, 1414–1445.
Jackson, Matthew O., 2014, Networks in the understanding of economic behaviors, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 28, 3–22.
Jackson, Matthew O., and Brian W. Rogers, 2007, Meeting strangers and friends of friends: How
random are social networks? American Economic Review 97, 890–915.
Kahneman, Daniel, 2011, Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, NY).
Katz, Elihu, and Paul Felix Lazarsfeld, 1955, Personal Influence: The Part Played by People in the
Flow of Mass Communications (Free Press, Glencoe, IL).
Kaustia, Markku, and Samuli Knüpfer, 2012, Peer performance and stock market entry, Journal
of Financial Economics 104, 321–338.
Kelly, Morgan, and Cormac Ó Gráda, 2000, Market contagion: Evidence from the panics of 1854
and 1857, American Economic Review 90, 1110–1124.
Keloharju, Matti, and Antti Lehtinen, 2015, Shareownership in Finland, Nordic Journal of Business 64, 182–206.
Kumar, Alok, 2009, Who gambles in the stock market? Journal of Finance 64, 1889–1933.
Lazarsfeld, Paul, Bernard Berelson, and Hazel Gaudet, 1948, The People’s Choice: How the Voter
Makes Up His Mind in a Presidential Campaign (Columbia University Press, New York, NY).
Luttmer, Erzo F. P., 2005, Neighbors as negatives: Relative earnings and well-being, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, 963–1002.
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook, 2001, Birds of a feather: Homophily
in social networks, Annual Review of Sociology 27, 415–444.
Newman, Mark E. J., 2005, Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipf’s law, Contemporary Physics
46, 323–351.
Ozsoylev, Han N., and Johan Walden, 2011, Asset pricing in large information networks, Journal
of Economic Theory 146, 2252–2280.
Ozsoylev, Han N., Johan Walden, M. Deniz Yavuz, and Recep Bildik, 2014, Investor networks in
the stock market, Review of Financial Studies 27, 1323–1366.
Pastor-Satorras, Romualdo, and Alessandro Vespignani, 2001, Epidemic spreading in scale-free
networks, Physical Review Letters 86, 3200–3202.
Pool, Veronika K., Noah Stoffman, and Scott E. Yonker, 2015, The people in your neighborhood:
Social interactions and mutual fund portfolios, Journal of Finance 70, 2679–2732.

How Do Investment Ideas Spread through Social Interaction?

2389

Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Irrational Exuberance (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Shiller, Robert J., 2014, Speculative asset prices, American Economic Review 104, 1486–1517.
Shiller, Robert J., and John Pound, 1989, Survey evidence on diffusion of interest and information
among investors, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 12, 47–66.
Shive, Sophie, 2010, An epidemic model of investor behavior, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 45, 169–198.
Stein, Jeremy C., 2008, Conversations among competitors, American Economic Review 98, 2150–
2162.

Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this
article at the publisher’s website:
Appendix S1: Internet Appendix.
Replication Code.

Copyright of Journal of Finance (John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) is the property of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.

