ROBERT J. SHILLER
Yale University

Stock Prices
and Social Dynamics
Fashion is the great governor of this world; it presides not only in matters of
dress and amusement, but in law, physic, politics, religion, and all other things
of the gravest kind; indeed, the wisest of men would be puzzled to give any
better reason why particular forms in all these have been at certain times
universally received, and at others universally rejected, than that they were in
or out of fashion.
Henry Fielding'
in speculative assets is a social activity. Investors spend a
substantial part of their leisure time discussing investments, reading
about investments, or gossiping about others' successes or failures in
investing. It is thus plausible that investors' behavior (and hence prices
of speculative assets) would be influenced by social movements. Attitudes or fashions seem to fluctuate in many other popular topics of
conversation, such as food, clothing, health, or politics. These fluctuations in attitude often occur widely in the population and often appear
without any apparent logical reason. It is plausible that attitudes or
fashions regarding investments would also change spontaneously or in
arbitrary social reaction to some widely noted events.
Most of those who buy and sell in speculative markets seem to take it
for granted that social movements significantly influence the behavior of
prices. Popular interpretations of the recurrent recessions that we
observe often include ideas that the shifts in, say, consumer confidence
INVESTING

John Pound provided research assistance. This research was supported by the National
Science Foundation under grant SES-8408565 and the Sloan Foundation.
1. Henry Fielding, The True Patriot, no. 1,1745, in James P. Browne, ed., The Works
of Henry Fielding, Esq., vol. 8 (London: Bickers and Son, 1903), p. 69.
457

458

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

or optimism are also at work in other aspects ofthe business cycle, such
as interest rates, inventories, and so on. Academic research on market
psychology, however, appears to have more or less died out in the 1950s,
at about the time the expected-utility revolution in economics was bom.
Those academics who write about financial markets today are usually
very careful to dissociate themselves from any suggestion that market
psychology might be important, as if notions of market psychology have
been discredited as unscientific.^ There is instead an enormous recent
literature in finance that takes one of the various forms of the efficient
markets hypothesis for motivation and a related literature in macroeconomics that is based on the assumption of rational expectations. In
academic circles there has certainly been an interest in speculative
bubbles, but pursued within the framework of rational expectations
models with unchanging tastes.^
It is hard to find in the large literature on the efficient markets
hypothesis any discussion of an altemative hypothesis involving social
psychology in financial markets."^ Yet the impression persists in the
literature and in casual discussions that there are very powerful arguments against such social-psychological theories. Arguments confined
to an oral tradition, tacitly accepted by all parties, and not discussed in
the scholarly literature are particularly vulnerable to error. It is thus
important to consider explicitly these arguments against a major role for
mass psychology infinancialmarkets.
Retums on speculative assets are nearly unforecastable; this fact is
the basis of the most important argument in the oral tradition against a
role for mass psychology in speculative markets. One form of this
2. The recent literature on behavioral economics associated with survey research has
apparently not touched substantially on speculative markets. Some of their findings are
relevant and will be cited below.
3. For example, David Cass and Karl Shell refer to market psychology in motivating
their discussion of extraneous uncertainty, but they then assume economic agents are
expected-utility maximizers with unchanging tastes. There is, however, a sense in which
they and others are wrestling with some of the same issues that are of concern in this
paper. See Cass and Shell, "Do Sunspots MSLUCTT' Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91
(April 1983), pp. 193-227.
4. There are some casual arguments in the literature against such a role for mass
psychology. The most-cited reference may be Eugene F. Fama, "The Behavior of Stock
Market Prices," Journal of Business, vol. 38 (January 1965), pp. 34-105. The argument
consists of no more than a few paragraphs pointing out that "sophisticated traders" might
eliminate profit opportunities, thereby tending to make "actual prices closer to intrinsic
values" (p. 38).

Robert J. Shiller

459

argument claims that because real returns are nearly unforecastable, the
real price of stocks is close to the intrinsic value, that is, the present
value with constant discount rate of optimally forecasted future real
dividends. This argument for the efficient markets hypothesis represents
one ofthe most remarkable errors in the history of economic thought. It
is remarkable in the immediacy of its logical error and in the sweep and
implications of its conclusion. I will discuss this and other arguments for
the efficient markets hypothesis and claim that mass psychology may
well be the dominant cause of movements in the price ofthe aggregate
stock market.
I have divided my discussion into four major sections: arguments
from a social-psychological standpoint for the importance of fashions in
financial markets, a critique of the argument for the efficient markets
hypothesis, a proposed altemative model based on social psychology,
and some exploratory data analysis suggested by the altemative model.
The first section discusses what we know about changing fashions or
attitudes in light of everyday experience, research in social psychology
and sociology, and evidence from postwar stock market history. This
will not be direct evidence that people violate the principle of expectedutility maximization, nor is the evidence of great value in judging how
far we should carry the assumption of rationality in other areas of
economics (although I think it is of value in understanding the business
cycle). Rather, I will be motivated here by the relatively narrow question
of why speculative asset prices fluctuate as much as they do.
The second section sets forth and evaluates the efficient markets
model and the presumed evidence against a role for social psychology
in determining prices. The fundamental issue is the power of statistical
tests in distinguishing the efficient markets model from the important
alternatives. If statistical tests have little power, then we ought to use
the sort of qualitative evidence discussed in the first section to evaluate
the efficient markets model.
The third section offers a simple though rather incomplete alternative
model of stock prices that admits the importance of social-psychological
factors. This model involves "smart-money investors" and "ordinary
investors" and is intended to demonstrate how models of financial
markets might better accommodate the econometric evidence on the
near unforecastability of retums, evidence that is widely interpreted as
favoring the efficient markets model.

460

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

The fourth section uses U.S. stock market data to explore some
relations suggested by the altemative model. Using Standard and Poor's
composite stock price index, I examine various forecasting equations
for real returns. I consider whether stock price movements seem to
follow simple patterns, as in an overreaction to dividends or earnings
news, and whether this overreaction induces a sort of forecastability for
returns. In doing this I present a time series model ofthe aggregate real
dividend series associated with Standard and Poor's composite stock
price index. I also propose a hypothetical scenario using the alternative
model that shows for recent U.S. history what the smart-money investors
may have been doing, the fraction of total trading volume that might
have been accounted for by smart-money trades in and out ofthe market,
and the extent to which ordinary investors may have influenced stock
prices.

Evidence on Fashions and Financial Markets
FASHIONS IN EVERYDAY LIFE

Isn't it plausible that those who are so enlightened as to be readers of
BPEA might find themselves caught up in capricious fashion changes?
Those of us involved in the current fashion of running for exercise may
say that we do it because it is good for our health, but the health benefits
of such exercise were known decades ago. ^Talking with runners suggests
that far more is at work in this movement than the logical reaction to a
few papers in medical journals. Why wasn't the joy of running appreciated twenty years ago? Why are we thinking about running these days
and not about once-popular leisure activities now in decline, such as
leading Boy Scout troops or watching western movies?^
Fashions in one country may often move in one direction while those
5. A few minutes spent with an index to periodical literature will confirm that the idea
that regular exercise helps prevent heart disease was part ofthe conventional wisdom by
the mid-1950s.
6. There seems to be the same superabundance of theories to explain the decline of
boy scouting since 1973 as for the decline in the stock market over the same period. See
"Whatever Happened to . . . Boy Scouts: Trying to Make a Comeback," U.S. News and
World Report (May 7, 1979), pp. 86-87. Those who think that people simply got tired of
westerns will have to explain why it took a generation for them to do so.

Robert J. Shiller

461

in another country are moving in a different direction. In politics, for
instance, we have seen in the last decade a drift toward conservatism in
some Western countries and a drift toward socialism in others. The
objective evidence for or against socialism cannot have moved both
ways. Something about the social environment, collective memories, or
leadership is different and changing through time differently in these
countries. Is there any reason to think that social movements affect
investments any less strongly than they do these other activities? We
know that attitudes toward investments are very different across cultures. In West Germany today investors are notably cautious; it is hard
to raise venture capital, and the stock market itself is very small. Isn't it
plausible that attitudes that change across countries should also change
within a country through time?
Some may argue that investing is less likely than other activities to be
influenced by fashions because people make investment choices privately, based on their perception ofthe prospects for return, and usually
not with any concern for what people will think. It is, however, plausible
that these perceptions of return themselves represent changing fashions.
The changing fashions in "physic" that Fielding noted are analogous.
Sick people in Fielding's day asked physicians to bleed them because
they thought they would get well as a result and not because they thought
that they would impress other people by having it done. Therapeutic
bleeding is an excellent example of a fashion because there has never
been any scientific basis for it; the belief in its efficacy arose entirely
from the social milieu.

WHO CONTROLS EQUITY INVESTMENTS?

It is important first to clarify the identity of investors in corporate
stock. It is widely and mistakenly believed that (1) institutional investors
hold most stocks, (2) most wealthy individuals have delegated authority
to manage their investments, and (3) smart money dominates the market.
By suggesting that the market is more professionalized than it is, these
misconceptions lend spurious plausibility to the notion that markets are
very efficient.
It is true that the importance of institutional investors has been
growing in the postwar period. Institutional holdings of New York Stock

462

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

Exchange stocks as a percent of the total value of the stocks rose from
15.0 percent in 1955 to 35.4 percent in 1980.^ Still, nearly 65 percent of
all New York Stock Exchange stocks were held by individuals in 1980.
Most individually held corporate stock belongs to the wealthy. In
1971, the 1 percent of U.S. families (including single individuals) with
the largest personal income accounted for 51 percent ofthe market value
of stock owned by all families, while the 10 percent of families with the
largest income accounted for 74 percent of market value.^ Wealthy
individuals are of course part ofthe same society as the rest of us. They
read the same newspapers and watch the same television programs.
They are different, however, in one important way. For them, information costs are quite low relative to the income from their investments.
One might be inclined to think that they would in practice delegate to
experts the authority over their investments.
A 1964 Brookings study interviewed 1,051 individuals with 1961
incomes of more than $ 10,000 (or about $34,000 in 1984 prices) concerning
their investment habits, among other things. The 1961 median income
for the sample was about $40,000 (or about $135,000 in 1984 prices).
*'Only one-tenth reported delegating some or all authority over their
investments, and this proportion reached one-fourth only for those with
incomes over $300,(X)0. Only 2 percent ofthe entire high-income group
said they delegated 'all' authority."' Instead of delegating authority,
most made their own investment decisions with some advice: ''About
three-fourths of the high income respondents who managed their own
assets said that they got advice from others in making their investment
decisions. One in three of those seeking advice said they 'always' sought
7. See New York Stock Exchange, New York Stock Exchange Fact Book 1983 (NYSE,
1983), p. 52. This source says that institutional investors accounted for 65 percent of all
public volume on the New York Stock Exchange in the fourth quarter of 1980 (p. 54).
Thus, institutional investors trade much more frequently than do individual investors.
Data that are probably more accurate on institutional holdings are in Irwin Friend and
Marshall Blume, The Changing Role ofthe Institutional Investor (Wiley, 1978); they
estimated that 24.9 percent of all stock was held by institutions and foreigners in 1971, up
from 17.9 percent in 1960 (p. 32).
8. See Marshall E. Blume, Jean Crockett, and Irwin Friend, "Stockownership in the
United States: Characteristics and Trends," Survey of Current Business, vol. 54 (November 1974), pp. 16-40. In 1981, 7.2 percent of households had income above $50,000
(Statistical Abstract ofthe United States. 1982-83, p. 430).
9. Robin Barlow, Harvey E. Brazer, and James N. Morgan, Economic Behavior ofthe
Affluent (Brookings, 1966), p. 26.

Robert J. Shiller

463

advice when investing, while two out of three said they did 'occasionally.' "'° Two-thirds of the investors said they tried to keep informed,
and more than half said they made use of business magazines, but "only
one-tenth of those trying to keep informed said that they read the
financial statements and other reports issued by the corporations in
which they were considering an investment.""
What is really important for one's view of financial markets is not
directly the extent to which institutional investors or wealthy individuals
dominate the market, but the extent to which smart money dominates
the market. One commonly expressed view is that intelligent individuals
can be assumed to take control of the market by accumulating wealth
through profitable trading. This argument overlooks the fact that individuals consume their wealth and eventually also die. When they die
they bequeath it to others who have perhaps only a small probability of
being smart investors as well. In assessing this probability, one must
bear in mind that the class of smart-money investors does not correspond
closely to the intelligent segment of the population. What is at work
behind smart money is not just intelligence but also interest in investments and timeliness. Presumably the probability is fairly low that heirs
are smart investors.'^
There are several factors that serve to mitigate the effects of higher
retums on the average wealth of smart-money investors. One is that
most people do not acquire most of their maximum wealth until fairly
late in the life cycle and thus do not have as much time to accumulate.
Another factor is that in a growing population, younger persons, whose
portfolios have had less time to accumulate, will figure more prominently
in the aggregate of wealth. Yet another factor is that saving early in the
life cycle tends for institutional reasons to take the form of investing in
a house rather than in speculative assets.
Roughly speaking, one can expect to live thirty years after receiving
a bequest on the death of one's parents. A representative smart-money
heir who earns and accumulates at a rate n greater than a representative
ordinary investor in the middle of the thirty years will thus have on
10. Ibid., p. 68.
11. Ibid., p. 71. These findings were also confirmed in other surveys. See George
Katona, Psychological Economics (Elsevier, 1975), p. 269.
12. The median correlation (from 12 studies) between IQs of natural parents and of
their children is 0.50. See H. J. Eysenck and Leon Kamin, The Intelligence Controversy
(WUey, 1980), p. 50.

464

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

average, if original bequests were equal, roughly (1 + nY^ times as much
wealth. If/? is 2 percent per year, this is 1.3; if 5 percent per year, this is
2.1. As long as the percentage of smart investors is small, retums that
are higher by this order of magnitude will not cause the smart money to
take over the market.
Of course, it is unlikely that smart-money investors are pure accumulators; because we lack data on their savings pattems versus the
savings pattems of ordinary investors, it is impossible to say anything
concrete about how much money smart investors accumulate. If the
smart investors behave like good trustees of the family estate and
consume at exactly the rate that would preserve the real value of the
family wealth, then smart money will not accumulate at all, regardless
ofthe return it earns.
THE AMBIGUITY OF STOCK VALUE

Stock prices are likely to be among the prices that are relatively
vulnerable to purely social movements because there is no accepted
theory by which to understand the worth of stocks and no clearly
predictable consequences to changing one's investments.
Ordinary investors have no model or at best a very incomplete model
of the behavior of prices, dividends, or earnings of speculative assets.
Do projections of large future deficits in the federal budget imply that
the price of long-term bonds will go up or down? Does the election of a
conservative U.S. president imply that eamings of General Motors will
go up or down? Does a rise in the price of oil cause the price of IBM
stock to go up or down? Ordinary investors have no objective way of
knowing.
Ordinary investors are faced with what Frank Knight in 1921 called
"uncertainty" rather than "risk":
The practical difference between the two categories, risk and uncertainty, is that
in the former the distribution of the outcome in a group of instances is known
(either from calculation a priori or from statistics of past experience), while in
the case of uncertainty this is not true, the reason being in general that it is
impossible to form a group of instances, because the situation dealt with is in a
high degree unique. . . . It is this true uncertainty which by preventing the
theoretically perfect outworking of the tendencies of competition gives the
characteristic form of "enterprise" to economic organization as a whole and
accounts for the peculiar income ofthe entrepreneur.'^
13. Frank H. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (Augustus M. Kelley, 1964), pp.
232-33.

Robert J. Shiller

465

Ordinary investors also cannot judge the competence of investment
counselors in the way they can that of other professionals. It is very easy
to leam whether a map company is producing correct maps; we can
therefore take it for granted that others have done this and that any map
that is sold will serve to guide us. It is much harder to evaluate investment
advisers who counsel individual investors on the composition of their
portfolios and who claim to help them make investments with high
retums. Most investors lack data on past outcomes of a counselor's
advice and on whether the current advice is based on the same approach
that produced these outcomes. Moreover, most investors do not understand data analysis or risk correction, necessary knowledge for evaluating the data.
It is also much easier to change one's mind on one's investments than
on one's consumption of commodities. The former has no apparent
immediate efifect on one's well being, whereas to change one's consumption of commodities, one must give up some habit or consume
something one formerly did not enjoy.
SUGGESTIBILITY AND GROUP PRESSURE

Since investors lack any clear sense of objective evidence regarding
prices of speculative assets, the process by which their opinions are
derived may be especially social. There is an extensive literature in
social psychology on individual suggestibility and group pressure. Much
of this literature seeks to quantify, by well-chosen experiments, how
individual opinions are influenced by the opinions of others. A good
example of such experiments is Muzafer Sherif s classic work using the
"autokinetic effect."'" In this experiment, subjects were seated in a
totally darkened room and asked to view at a distance of five meters a
point of light seen through a small hole in a metal box. They were told
that the point of light would begin to move and were asked to report to
the experimenter the magnitude, in inches, of its movements. In fact,
the point was not moving, and the viewer had no frame of reference, in
the total darkness, to decide how it was moving. When placed in groups
so that they could hear answers of others in the group, the individuals
arrived, without any discussion, at consensuses (differing across groups)
14. See Muzafer Sherif, "An Experimental Approach to the Study of Attitudes,"
Sociometry, vol. 1 (1937), pp. 90-98.

466

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

on the amount of movement. Subjects, interviewed afterward, showed
little awareness ofthe influence ofthe group on their individual decision.
In another well-known experiment, Solomon Asch had individuals
alone and in groups compare the lengths of line segments. The lengths
were sufficiently different that, when responding alone, subjects gave
very few wrong answers. Yet when placed in a group in which all other
members were coached to give the same wrong answers, individual
subjects also frequently gave wrong answers.'^ Through follow-up
questions, Asch found that even though the subject was often aware of
the correct answer, and the answer was completely inoffensive, the
subject was afraid to contradict the group.
The research shows evidence offlagrantdecision errors under social
pressure but not of abandonment of rational individual judgment. It does
help provide some understanding of possible origins of swings in public
opinion. The Asch experiment suggests that group pressures do serve at
the very least to cause individuals to remain silent when their own views
appear to deviate from the group's, and their silence will prevent the
dissemination of relevant information that might establish the dissenters'
views more firmly.
THE DIFFUSION OF OPINIONS

The dynamic process by which social movements take place is the
subject of an extensive literature by social psychologists and sociologists,
and the basic mechanisms are well known. The ideas that represent a
movement may be latent in people's minds long before the movement
begins. An idea may not become a matter of conviction or active thought
until the individual hears the idea from several friends or from public
authorities. This process takes time. The process may be helped along
if some vivid news event causes people to talk about related matters or
slowed if a news event distracts their attention.
Social movements can take place in a matter of hours after so vivid
an event as the onset of a war. Or changes in attitudes can take decades
to diffuse through the population, as evidenced by the fact that many
fashion changes in dress seem to happen very slowly. The communications media may, if attention is given to some event, speed the rate of
15. See Solomon E. Asch, Social Psychology (Prentice Hall, 1952).

Robert J. Shiller

467

diffusion. However, the generalfindingof research on persuasion is that
"any impact that the mass media have on opinion change is less than
that produced by informal face-to-face communication of the person
with his primary groups, his family, friends, coworkers, and neighbors."'^ This fact is recognized by television advertisers who, in promoting their products, often try to create with actors the illusion of such
communication. Katona has used the term social learning to refer to the
slow process of "mutual reinforcement through exchange of information
among peer groups by word of mouth, a major condition for the
emergence of a uniform response to new stimuli by very many people.'' '^
Thus, it is not surprising that in surveys in the 1950s and 1960s "the
answers to the two questions 'Do you own any stocks' and 'Do you have
any friends or colleagues who own any stocks' were practically identiSuch diffusion processes for news or rumor have been modeled more
formally by mathematical sociologists drawing on the mathematical
theory of epidemics. '^ For example, in what has been referred to as the
"general epidemic model,"^o it is assumed, first, that new carriers of
news (as of a disease) are created at a rate equal to an "infection rate"
p times the number of carriers times the number of susceptibles and,
second, that carriers cease being carriers at a "removal rate" T. The first
assumption is that of the familiar model which gives rise to the logistic
curve, and the second assumption causes any epidemic or social movement eventually to come to an end. In this model a new infectious agent
or an event interpreted as important news can have either of two basic
consequences. If the infection rate is less than a threshold equal to the
removal rate divided by the number of susceptibles, the number of
carriers will decline monotonically. If the infection rate is above the
threshold, the number of carriers will have a hump-shaped pattern, rising
atfirstand then declining.
16. William J. McGuire, "The Nature of Attitudes and Attitude Change," in Gardner
Lindzey and Elliot Aronson, eds.. Handbook of Social Psychology (Addison Wesley,
1969), p. 231.
17. See Katona, Psychological Economics, p. 203.
18. Ibid., p. 267.
19. See for example David J. Bartholomew, Stochastic Models for Social Processes
(Wiley, 1967).
20. See Norman T. Bailey, The Mathematical Theory of Epidemics (London: C.
Griffin, 1957).

468

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

The removal rate and the infection rate may differ dramatically from
one social movement to another depending on the characteristics ofthe
sources, media, and receivers. One survey ofthe literature on removal
rates after persuasive communications concluded that "the 'typical'
persuasive communication has a half-life of six months'' but that different
experiments produced widely different half-lives.^^ Changes in the
infection rate or removal rate may be what accounts for the sudden
appearance of some social movements. A rise in the infection rate, for
example, may cause an attitude long latent in people's minds to snowball
into a movement.
We might expect then to see a variety of patterns in social movements:
long-lasting "humps" that build slowly (low removal and infection rate)
or that rise and fall quickly (high removal and infection rate); news
events with a subsequent monotonie decline of infectives (zero infection
rate) or followed by a monotonically increasing number of infectives
(zero removal rate). Of course, such patterns may not be seen directly
in prices of speculative assets, as the "altemative model" I present later
in the paper will show.
SOCIAL MOVEMENTS AND THE POSTWAR STOCK MARKET

The real price of corporate stocks, as measured by a deflated Standard
and Poor's composite stock price index (figure 1), shows what appears
to be a pronounced uptrend between the late 1940s and the late 1960s
and since then a downtrend (or, more accurately, a single major drop
between 1973 and 1975). The postwar uptrend period, the last great bull
market, has often been characterized as one of contagious and increasingly excessive optimism. Is there any evidence of such a social movement then? Is there evidence that such a social movement came to an
end after the late 1960s?
Such evidence will not take the form of proof that people should have
known better than to price stocks as they did. The postwar period was
one of rapidly growing real earnings and real dividends, and that the
21. McGuire, 'The Nature of Attitudes," pp. 253-54. A description of recent research
in marketing journals on the removal rate is in Richard P. Bagozzi and Alvin J. Silk,
"Recall, Recognition, and the Measurement of Memory for Print Advertisements,"
Marketing Science, vol. 2 (Spring 1983), pp. 95-134. See Bartholomew, Stochastic Models,
for a discussion of empirical work on the infection rate.

Figure 1. Standard and Poor*s Stock Price Data, 1926-84''
100
Real stock prices*'

/I

6-

Real earnings'^ /•*^'*\

/
\

\

/

V

44
•

1

A

/•*.I^\ •

2-

0

/

/.'"'if.

••.. •
. . 1 .

•

I l l

•

••

t

20

.

Price-dividend ri

30 •
.*
•

'.
*

i

l^

••
*
' •*
.* •

•• J'.•

•. •

•

»t

\

V

/

•

•

1

10

^40

%

\

r

•

. 1.

1.

1935

. . . 1. . . . 1 ..

1945

•• •• v' **.•*•*..*•. *. '.
*•• •*
*. ••
•* *•
" *. *

••

»••' \ ' ' J \

0 ..
1926

^ \ ^^^^ dividends'*

...•*

. . . 1. .

,

^•*

/

1 . 1 . . .

^^Price-earnings ratio^
. 1 . . . .

1955

1 . . . .

1 . . . . 1 . . . .

1965

"^-^^^
1 . . . .

1975

1 ...

1984

Source: Calculated from data from Standard and Poor's Statistical Service and the U.S, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
a. Annual data, fifty-nine observations from 1926 to 1984. The stock price index is Standard and Poor's composite
stock price index.
b. Stock price index for January (1941-43 = 100) divided by the January producer price index, all items, times
100.
c. Four-quarter total for the fourth quarter of Standard and Poor's earnings per share adjusted to the stock price
index, divided by the January producer price index, times 100.
d. Four-quarter total for the fourth quarter of Standard and Poor's dividends per share adjusted to the stock price
index, divided by the January producer price index, times 100.
e. Computed by dividing the stock price series by the dividends series for the preceding year (in nominal terms).
f. Computed as for the price-dividend ratio, with eamings in place of dividends.

470

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

growth should be expected to continue was an idea backed by plausible
reasons, such as:
the constant speed-up in business research in order to cut costs and bring out
ever newer and more competitive products; the extension of business expansion
planning farther and farther into the future, which means that such plans are
carded forward regardless of anyjiggles in the trend of business; the improvement
in business techniques that offset the effects of seasonalfluctuations;the advance
in methods of monetary management by the Federal Reserve Board; and the
similar advance in general understanding ofthe effects ofthe Government's tax
and other economic policies."
How was anyone to know whether these reasons were right or not?
The evidence for a social movement driving the bull market will come
instead from other sources. The evidence will be the growing numbers
of individuals who participated in, were interested in, or knew about the
market; the changes in relations between investor and agent; and the
changes in attitudes that might plausibly affect the valuation of stocks.
The evidence is not intended to provide a tight theory ofthe movements
of stock prices but to show that large social movements appear to have
occurred that might plausibly have had a great impact on stock prices.
In fact, there is a superabundance of plausible reasons for the movements
ofthe market.
Evidence for the growing numbers of individuals who participated in
the market can of course be found most directly in the rising quantity of
stocks held by institutional investors. The most important component
of this increase was pension funds. The rise of employer pension funds
in the postwar period might even be considered a social movement that
probably caused an increased demand for shares. Individuals may, by
saving less themselves, offset the saving done on their behalf by firms;
but because most people do not hold any stocks, it is not possible for
them (without short sales) to offset the institutional demand for stocks
by holding fewer shares. Such changes in demand by institutions are
likely to be important in determining asset prices but are not my main
concern here. Others have studied such changes using fiow-of-funds
methodology. 2^
22. George Shea, Wall Street Journal, October 12, 1955, reprinted in Forty Years on
Wall Street (Princeton, N.J.: Dow Jones, 1968), pp. 42-43.
23. For a recent example, see Benjamin M. Friedman, "Effects of Shifting Saving
Patterns on Interest Rates and Economic Activity," Journal of Finance, vol. 37 (March
1982), pp. 37-62.

Robert J. Shiller

471

The period of rising stock prices also corresponds roughly with a
period of a dramatic increase in the number of people who participated
directly (not through institutions) in the stock market. The New York
Stock Exchange shareownership surveys showed that the total number
of individual shareowners as a percent of the U.S. population rose from
4 percent in 1952 to 7 percent in 1959 to a peak of 15 percent in 1970.^4
The corresponding numbers for 1975, 1980, and 1981 varied from 11
percent to 12 percent.^^
The increase in individual stockownership appears to correspond to
an increase in knowledge about and interest in the market. The 1954
New York Stock Exchange investor attitude survey, consisting of
interviews of several thousand individuals, was motivated by the question, Why is it that "4 out of 5 doctors, lawyers, major and minor
executives, engineers and salesmen do not own stock in publicly owned
corporations?"2^ What came out of the survey was a sense of lack of
information or interest in the stock market and vague senses of prejudice
against the stock market. Only 23 percent of the adult population knew
enough to define corporate stock as "a share in profit," ''bought and
sold by public, anyone can buy," or '*not preferred or a bond."
By 1959 there appeared a "much better understanding ofthe functions
ofthe Stock Exchange as the nation's marketplace." The number of
Americans who could *'explain the functions ofthe Exchange" rose
neariy 20 percent. The number who knew "that companies must meet
certain standards before the Exchange will permit their stocks to be
listed for trading" increased 36 percent in the same five-year period.^^
The growth of numbers of people who knew about or were involved
at all in the stock market is important evidence that something other
than a reevaluation of optimal forecasts of the long-run path of future
24. New York Stock Exchange, Share-ownership 1952 through 7970 (NYSE, 1953
through 1971). The rise before 1970 of shareownership involved a trend toward somewhat
more egalitarian distribution of stock. In 1958, 83.2 percent of stock value was owned by
individuals with the top 10 percent of income. By 1970, this had fallen to 75.4 percent. See
Friend, Blume, and Crockett, "Stockownership," p. 27.
25. New York Stock Exchange, Share-ownership 1975,1980, and 1981 (NYSE, 1976,
1981, and 1982).
26. New York Stock Exchange, The Public Speaks to the Exchange Community
(NYSE, 1955), p. 54.
27. See New York Stock Exchange, The Investors of Tomorrow, title page and p 6
(NYSE, 1960).

472

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

dividends was at work in producing the bull market. Any model that
attributes the increase in stock prices to a Bayesian leaming process will
not stand up to the observation that most ofthe investors at the peak of
the bull market were not involved or interested in the market at all at the
beginning ofthe increase.
Evidence about changing relations between individual investors and
their agents takes two forms: evidence regarding the rise of stockbrokers
and of publicity campaigns from them and evidence regarding the
investment club movement.
Between 1954 and 1959 stockbrokers were growing in reputation. In
the 1954 New York Stock Exchange survey 30 percent of the adult
population said they would tumfirstto a broker for investment advice;
by 1959 thisfigurehad risen to 38 percent. During thisfive-yearperiod,
stockbrokers replaced bankers as thefirstsource of investment advice.
An estimated 9 miUion adults said they were contacted by brokers in
1959, compared with fewer than 5 million in 1954.^8
The New York Stock Exchange initiated an investors' education
program as part of a broader shareownership program. Begun in 1954,
the program by 1959 had a list of 2,500 lecturers in 85 cities. Lectures
were held in local high schools as part of adult education programs by
lecturers *'bent on carrying the investing gospel . . . wherever there
were ears to hear."^'
By 1959 the program had conducted 4,500 lecture courses reaching
525,000 persons or about 4 percent ofthe total number of shareholders
in 1959. The investor education program used all the media, including
advertisements in newspapers and magazines and on radio. As early as
1954, when the program was only six months old, 5 percent ofthe adult
population in the United States could identify the New York Stock
Exchange as the source of the slogan "Own Your Share of American
In contrast the 1970s was a period of low profits for the New York
Stock Exchange and advertising in newspapers and magazines was
suspended. In 1975 competitive commissions were established and
amendments to the Securities Act threatened the viability of the New
York Stock Exchange. Prices of seats on the exchange dropped. In
response to the problems, the exchange in 1977 severely cut back the
28. New York Stock Exchange, Investors of Tomorrow, pp. 9,14.
29. See New York Times. September 20,1959.
30. New York Stock Exchange, The Public Speaks, p. 10.

Robert J. Shiller

473

investors' education program and dropped the adult education program.
Lack of public enthusiasm for the program was also offered as a reason
for the cutback. The same factors that caused the New York Stock
Exchange to suspend its investors' education program may have also
had the effect of decreasing the efforts of individual brokers to promote
corporate stocks. Such factors as competitive commissions, which
reduce the profits in conventional brokerages, have "tended to shrink
the numbers of people who are out there trying to encourage individual
investors into this market place. "^'
Investment clubs are social clubs in which small groups of people
pursue together a hobby of investing. Interest in such clubs might well
give some indication of how much stocks were talked about and how
much people enjoyed investing. The number of clubs in the National
Association of Investment Clubs rose from 923 in 1954 to a peak of
14,102 in 1970 and then fell to 3,642 in 1980.^2 The total number of
individuals directly involved in investment clubs and their aggregate
wealth is of course small. However, the investment club movement is
plausible evidence of a national movement that is not reflected in the
membership rolls.
There is in the postwar period evidence of substantial changes in
behavior big enough to have a major impact on the market. For example,
the percentage of people who said that religion is "very important" in
their lives fell from 75 percent in 1952 to 52 percent in 1978." The birth
rate hovered around 2.5 percent throughout the 1950s and then began a
gradual decline to around 1.5 percent in the 1970s. These changes may
reflect changing attitudes toward the importance of family, of heirs, or
of individual responsibility for others.
Of all such changes, the one with perhaps the most striking importance
for demand for shares in the postwar period is the pervasive dechne in
confidence in society's institutions after the bull market period. According to poll analyst Daniel Yankelovich:
We have seen a steady rise of mistrust in our national institutions. . . . Trust in
government declined dramatically from almost 80% in the late 1950s to about
33% in 1976. Confidence in business fell from approximately a 70% level in the
late 60s to about 15% today. Confidence in other institutions—the press, the
31. Robert M. Gardiner, chairman of Reynolds Securities, Inc., as quoted in New
York Stock Exchange, Share-ownership 1975 (NYSE, 1976), p. 21.
32. Data from the National Association of Investment Clubs.
33. See "Religion in America," The Gallup Report, no. 222 (March 1984).

474

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

military, the professions—doctors and lawyers—sharply declined from the mid-

To Yankelovich's list we may add stockbrokers. One ofthefindingsof
the New York Stock Exchange 1977-78 survey was that **a negative
image of brokers andfirmspermeates all subgroups and even top quality
clients have an unfavorable impression ofthe industry. "^^ By their very
pervasiveness, the negative attitudes toward institutions suggest a
prejudice rather than an informed judgment.

The Efficient Markets Model
The observation that stock returns are not very forecastable is widely
thought to mean that investor psychology could not be an important
factor in financial markets. Why is it thought so? If investor fads
infiuenced stock prices, the argument goes, then it would seem that these
fads would cause stock price movements to be somewhat predictable.
Moreover, because dividends themselves are somewhat forecastable
(firms in fact announce changes in their dividends from time to time),
and in spite of this we are unable to forecast well any change in retums,
it must be true that stock prices in some sense are determined in
anticipation of dividends paid. Thus, stock prices should be determined
by optimal forecasts of dividends.
The above argument can be formalized by representing the unforecastability of retums by E,R, = 8, where Et denotes mathematical
expectation conditional on all publicly available information at time r,
R, is the real (corrected for inflation) rate of return (including both
dividends and capital gain) on a stock between time t and time / + 1, and
6 is a constant. Here, R, equals (P,+, - P, + D^IP, where P, is the real
price ofthe share at time / and D, any real dividend which might be paid
in the time period. This is afirst-orderrational expectations model ofthe
kind familiar in the literature that can be solved, subject to a stability
34. From a speech, April 1977, quoted in Seymour Martin Lipset and William
Schneider, The Confidence Gap: Business, Labor and Government in the Public Mind
(Free Press, 1983), p. 15. The Gallup Poll also documents a fairly steady decline in
confidence in all major institutions over the years 1973-83. See Gallup Report, no. 217
(October 1983).
35. See New York Stock Exchange, Public Attitudes Toward Investing: Marketing
Implications (NYSE, 1979), p. 5.

Robert J. Shiller

475

terminal condition, by recursive substitution.^^ Out ofthe negative result
that we cannot seem to forecast returns we thus get the powerful efficient
markets model:^^
(1)

Pt =

Equation 1 asserts that real price is the present discounted value of
expected future dividends, and in this sense price anticipates optimally
(that is, takes into account all publicly available information) the stream
of dividends that the stock will pay in the future.
There is a fundamental error in this argument for the efficient markets
model: it overlooks the fact that the statistical tests have not shown that
returns are not forecastable; they have shown only that retums are not
very forecastable. The word very is crucial here, since alternative models
that have price determined primarily by fads (such as will be discussed
below) also imply that retums are not very forecastable.
We can get some idea at this point ofthe power ofthe regression tests
ofthe efficient markets model against importantly different alternatives.
Consider an altemative model in which the true (theoretical) R^ in a
regression of aggregate retums of corporate stocks on some set of
information variables is 0.1. Given that the standard deviation ofthe real
annual returns on the aggregate stock market is about 18 percent, such
an R~ implies that the standard deviation of the predictable component
of returns is about 5.7 percent per year. Thus, under this altemative
36. One rearranges the equation to read P, = bEiDi + bE^P,^,, where b = 1/(1 + 8),
and then uses the fact that £,£,+* = E, if k > 0. One substitutes in the above rational
expectations model forP,.,, yielding/*, = bEJ), + b-E,D,^^ + />2£^,.^2. One repeats this
process, successively substituting for the price terms on the right hand side. The terminal
condition assumption in the text is that the price term, b'*E,F,.^n, goes to zero as n goes to
infinity.
37. Paul Samuelson explains the relationship of this model to the random walk model
in his "Proof that properly discounted present values of assets vibrate randomly," in
Hiroaki Nagatani and Kate Crowley, eds., The Collected Scientific Papers of Paul A.

Samuelson, vol. 4 (MIT Press, 1977), pp. 465-70. It should be emphasized of course that
there is no agreement on the precise definition ofthe term "efficient markets model" or
whether it corresponds to equation 1. For example, in his well-known survey, Eugene
Fama says only that "a market in which prices always 'fully reflect' available information
is called 'efficient.' " The empirical work he discusses, however, tests the hypothesis that
price changes or retums are unforecastable. See Eugene F. Fama, "Efficient Capital
Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work," Journal of Finance, vol. 25 (May
1970), pp. 383-417.

476

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

model we might well predict real returns of 14 percent in one year and 2
percent in another (these are one-standard-deviation departures from
mean retum). In an unusual year we might predict a real retum of 19
percent or - 3 percent (these are two-standard-deviation departures
from the mean retum). Yet if the alternative model is true with thirty
observations (thirty years of data) and one forecasting variable, the
probability of rejecting market efficiency in a conventional F-test at the
0.05 level is only 0.42. With two forecasting variables, the probability of
rejecting is 0.32, and the probability becomes negligible as the number
of explanatory variables is increased further.^^ As I have argued in a
paper with Pierre Perron, increasing the number of observations by
sampling more frequently while leaving the span in years of data
unchanged may not increase the power of tests very much and may even
reduce it.^'
Someone may well wonder if there is not also some direct evidence
that stock prices really do anticipate future dividends in the manner
represented in equation 1. There is anecdotal evidence that the prices of
some firms whose dividends can be forecasted to fall to zero (bankruptcy)
or soar to new levels (breakthrough) do anticipate these movements.
But these anecdotes do not show that there is not another component of
the volatility of prices, a component that might dominate price movements in the stocks whose dividends are not so forecastable. For the
aggregate stock market, there is no evidence at all that stock price
movements have been followed by corresponding dividend movements.^
Some may argue that the constancy of discount rates in equation 1
may not be an appropriate feature for a general model of market
efficiency. There are, of course, many variations on this model, such as
the recent ''consumption beta'' models.^' It is not possible to address all
38. These power computations are based on the usual assumption of normal residuals;
as a result the conventional F-statistic is, under the altemative hypothesis, distributed as
noncentral F, with k - \ and n - \ degrees of freedom and noncentrality parameter
(n/2)/?V(l - /?2), where R^ is the theoretical coefficient of determination under the
altemative hypothesis.
39. See Robert J. Shiller and Pierre Perron, "Testing the Random Walk Hypothesis:
Power vs. Frequency of Observation" (Yale University, 1984).
40. See Robert J. Shiller, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by
Subsequent Changes in DmdendsV American Economic Review, vol. 71 (June 1981), pp.
421-36.
41. My own discussion of these and their plausibility in light of data may be found in
Robert J. Shiller, "Consumption, Asset Markets and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," in

Robert J. Shiller

477

these alternatives here. Equation 1 is chosen as the most commonplace
version of the efficient markets theory and a version that seems to have
figured most prominently in the arguments against market psychology.
Moreover, arguments about the power of tests of equation 1 may well
extend to some ofthe other variants ofthe efficient markets hypothesis.

An Alternative Model

Let us postulate the existence of smart-money investors who, subject
to their wealth hmitations, respond quickly and appropriately to publicly
available information. Consider a story that tells how they might alter
the response ofthe market to the behavior of ordinary investors. This
story is no doubt oversimplified and restrictive, but then so is the simple
efficient markets model, with which it is to be compared.
Smart-money investors in this model respond to rationally expected
retums but to an extent limited by their wealth. Suppose that their
demand for stock is linear in the expected return on the market (or if the
model is applied to an individualfirm,the expected return on a share of
thatfirm)over the next time period:
9

Here, Q, is the demand for shares by smart money at time / expressed as
a portion ofthe total shares outstanding, and E,Rf is the expected return
starting at time /, defined as it is above. The symbols p and cp represent
constants. Thus, p is the expected real return such that there is no
demand for shares by the smart money. The real return at which Qt = I
is p + (p; that is, 9 is the risk premium that would induce smart money
to hold all the shares. The terms p and cp reflect the risk aversion ofthe
smart money as well as the total real wealth of those smart-money
investors who have evaluated the stock, the riskiness ofthe stock, and
characteristics of altemative investments.
Ordinary investors include everyone who does not respond to expected returns optimally forecasted. Let us suppose that they overreact
to news or are vulnerable to fads. We will not make assumptions about
Karl Brunner and Allah H. Meltzer, eds., Economic Policy in a World of Change, Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy, vol. 17 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1982),
pp.203-38.

478

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

their behavior at all, but merely define Y, as the total value of stock
demanded per share by these investors.'*^ Equilibrium in this market
requires that Q, + YJPf = 1. Solving the resulting rational expectations
model just as we did to derive equation 1 gives us the model
00

(3)

(1 + p +

so that real price is the present value, discounted at rate p + 9, of both
the expected future dividend payments and cp times the expected future
demand by ordinary investors. The limit of this expression as 9 goes to
zero (that is, as smart money becomes more and more influential) is the
ordinary efficient markets model that makes price the present value of
expected dividends. The limit of this expression as 9 goes to infinity (as
smart money becomes less and less influential) is the model P, = K,, so
that ordinary investors determine the price.
Equation 3 and the efficient markets model (equation 1) could be
equally consistent with the usualfindingin the event-studies literature
that announcements have their effect on returns as soon as the information becomes public and have little predictable effect thereafter.
Equation 3 has, however, a very different interpretation for the jump in
price that coincides with the announcement. Thejump does not represent
only what the smart money thinks the announcement means for future
dividends. It also represents what the smart money thinks the announcement means for the demand for stock by ordinary investors. Equation 3
implies that the price effect of changes in the outlook for future dividends
will be governed by equation 1 if F, is not also affected by these changes.
However, if Y, is always positive, the discount rate p + cp in equation 3
is necessarily greater than or equal to the expected return on the market,
which is the discount factor in equation 1. If p + 9 is high, then factors
affecting expectations of distant dividends will have relatively little effect
on price today.
The more persistent is the behavior of the variable F, through time
(that is, the less we can expect changes in Y, to be offset by subsequent
changes in the opposite direction), the less the moving average in
expression 3 will reduce its variance and the more, in general, will be its
influence on P,.
42. That is, Y, is the total shares demanded at current price times current price divided
by numberof shares outstanding. If we assume thatdemandelasticity by ordinary investors
is unitary, we might regard Y, as exogenous to this model.

Robert J. Shiller

479

I argued above that models of the diffusion of opinions suggest a
number of possible patterns of response, among them a hump-shaped
pattem in which Y, would rise for a while, level off, and then return to
its normal level. The implication for real price P, of such a hump-shaped
response of Y, to a piece of news depends on the time frame of the
response relative to the discount rate p -H (p. Suppose the hump can be
predicted to build up very quickly and dissipate, say, in a matter of
weeks. Then equation 3 implies that there will be very little impact on
price. The relatively long moving average in equation 3 will smooth over
the hump in K, so that it is observed, if at all, only in a very attenuated
form. The demand for shares by ordinary investors will show the humpshaped pattem as smart money sells shares to them at virtually unchanged
prices only to buy the shares back after the ordinary investors have lost
interest.
If the hump-shaped pattem takes longer to evolve, the effect on price
will be bigger. Then as soon as the news that gives rise to the humpshaped pattem becomes known to the smart money, the price of the
stock will jump discontinuously. This jump will be instantaneous, taking
effect as soon as the smart money realizes that the price will be higher
in the future. After the initial jump, the effect ofthe news will be to cause
the price of the stock to rise gradually as Y, approaches its peak (not so
fast as to cause higher than normal retums after the lower dividend-price
ratio is taken into account); the price will peak somewhat before y does
and then decline. Returns, however, will tend to be low during the period
of price rise.
A more explicit yet simple example along these lines will illustrate
why tests of market efficiency may have low power even if the market is
driven entirely by fashions or fads. Suppose that the dividend Dt is
constant through time, so that by the efficient markets model (equation
1) price would always be constant. Suppose also that Y, = t/,_, + Ut-2
+ . . . + Ut-n, where Ut is white noise, that is, t/, is uncorrelated with
Ut-k for all k not equal to zero. Suppose current and lagged values for U
are in the information set ofthe smart money. Here, F responds to an
observed shock in U with a rising, then falling (or square hump) pattern.
Under these assumptions, K,+ i - Yf is perfectly forecastable based on
information at time t. However, Pt+\ - Pt will be hardly forecastable
from information at time /. It follows from equation 3 that P, will equal a
constant plus a moving average of U with substantial weight on U,. The
theoretical R^ in a regression of Pt+\ - Pt on P, is only 0.015 for the case

480

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

n = 20 years, p = 0, and 9 = 0.2. If one included all information (the
current and twenty lagged C/values) in the regression, the theoretical/?2
would rise, but only to 0.151. If the C/, are for each / uniformly distributed
from 0 to 1, and if the constant dividend is 0.5 (so that the mean dividend
price ratio is 4 percent) then the theoretical R^ (as estimated in a Monte
Carlo experiment) in a regression ofthe return R, on D,/Pi is only 0.079.
Let us now consider three altemative extreme views ofthe behavior
of Y,: that it responds to exogenous fads whose origin is unrelated to
relevant economic data, that it responds to lagged returns, and that it
responds to dividends.
Thefirstextreme view is that K, is independent of current and lagged
dividends; it is exogenous noise caused by capricious fashions or fads.
In this view, Y, may respond systematically to vivid news events (say,
the president suffering a heart attack) but not to any time-series data that
we observe. It is reasonable also to suppose that Y, is a stationary
stochastic process in that it tends to return to a mean. Thus, if demand
by ordinary investors is high relative to the mean of Y, it can be expected
eventually to decline. If dividends vary relatively little through time, an
argument can then be made that would suggest that return is positively
correlated with the dividend-price ratio DJP,. In the next section this
correlation will be examined with data.
The second extreme view is that Y, responds to past retums, that is,
Y, is a function of/?,_i, Rt-2, and so on. Together with equation 2 this
gives a simple rational expectations model whose only exogenous
variable is the dividend D,. If we were to specify the function relating Y,
to past returns and specify the stochastic properties of D^, we would be
left with a model that makes P, driven exclusively by D,. Depending on
the nature ofthe function and the stochastic properties of D,, price may
overreact to dividends relative to equation 1.
The third extreme view is that Y, responds directly to current and
lagged dividends, that is, Y, is directly a function of D,, D,_,, D,_2, and
so on. For example, dividend growth may engender expectations of
future real dividend growth that are unwarranted given the actual
stochastic properties ofD,. Such expectations might also cause price to
overreact to dividends relative to equation 1. Such an overreaction (to
dividends as well as to eamings) will be studied econometrically below.
My suggestions about the possible behavior of Y, are perhaps too
extreme and special to provide the basis for serious econometric mod-

Robert J. Shiller

481

eling now. However, these possibilities and equation 3 provide the
motivation for some exploratory data analysis.

An Exploratory Data Analysis
STOCK PRICES APPEAR TO OVERREACT TO DIVIDENDS

Aggregate real stock prices are fairly highly correlated over time with
aggregate real dividends. The simple correlation coefficient between the
annual (January) real Standard and Poor's composite stock price index
P and the corresponding annual real dividend series D between 1926 and
1983 is 0.91 (figure l).''^ This correlation is partly due to the common
trend between the two series, but the trend is by no means the whole
story. The correlation coefficient between the real stock price index P
and a linear time trend over the same sample is only 0.60.'*^ Thus, the
price of the aggregate stock market is importantly linked to its dividends,
and much of the movements of the stock market that we often regard as
inexplicable can be traced to movements in dividends. One reason that
most of us are not accustomed to thinking of the stock market in this
way is that most of the data series cover a smaller time interval (years
rather than the decades shown in the figure) and sample the data more
frequently (monthly, say, rather than the annual rate shown in the figure).
The correlation coefficient between real price and real dividends might
be much lower with data from the smaller, more frequently sampled time
interval or might appear to be more dominated by trend.
The correlation between real price P and the real earnings series Efor
1926 to 1983 is 0.75. This number is closer to the correlation ofP with a
linear time trend. Although the correlation coefficient between P and D
is fairly high, the real price is substantially more volatile than the real
dividend. If P is regressed on D with a constant term in the 1926-83
sample period, the coefficient of D is 38.0 and the constant term is - 0.28.
The average price-dividend ratio P/D in this sample is 22.4. The real
43. The correlation of P with D for the years 1871-1925 was 0.84. In this paper,
dividend and eamings series before 1926 are from the book which originated what is now
called the Standard and Poor's composite stock price index: Alfred Cowles and Associates,
Common-Stock Indexes, 1871-1937 (Principia Press, 1938), series Da-1 and Ea-1. All
series are deflated by the producer price index (January starting 1900, annual series before
1900), where 1967 = 100.
44. The correlation of i» with time for 1871 to 1925 was 0.43.

482

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

price moves proportionally more than the real dividend, and as a result
P/D tends to move with real prices. The correlation in this sample of P/D
with P (0.83) and with D (0.67) is strong enough that it can be seen in the
figure. The volatility of stock prices relative to dividends is another
reason why we tend not to view the stock market as driven so closely by
dividends.
One would think that if the efficient markets model (equation 1) is
true, the price-dividend ratio should be low when real dividends are high
(relative to trend or relative to the dividends' average value in recent
history) and high when real dividends are low. One would also think that
the real price, which represents according to equation 1 the long-run
outlook for real dividends, would be sluggish relative to the real dividend.
Therefore, short-run movements in the real dividend would correspond
to short-run movements in the opposite direction in the price-dividend
ratio.
The observed perverse behavior of the price-dividend ratio might be
described as an overreaction of stock prices to dividends, if it is correct
to suppose that dividends tend to retum to trend or retum to the average
of recent history. This behavior of stock prices may be consistent with
some psychological models. Psychologists have shown in experiments
that individuals may continually overreact to superficially plausible
evidence even when there is no statistical basis for their reaction.''^ Such
an overreaction hypothesis does not necessarily imply that the ultimate
source of stock price movements should be thought of as dividends or
the earnings offirms.Dividends are under the discretion of managers.^
John Lintner, after a survey of dividend setting behavior of individual
firms, concluded thatfirmshave a target payout ratio from eamings but
also feel that they should try to keep dividends fairly constant through
time.^^ In doing this, managers, like the public, are forecasting eamings
and may become overly optimistic or pessimistic. In reality, the divi45. See for example Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, ''Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases," Science, vol. 185 (September 1974), pp. 1124-31.
46. Marsh and Merton claimed that dividends are detennined by management's optimal
forecast of long-run eamings. See Terry A. Marsh and Robert C. Merton, "Aggregate
Dividend Behavior and Its Implications for Tests of Stock Market Rationality," Working
Paper 1475-83 (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Alfred P. Sloan School of Management, September 1983).
47. See John Lintner, "Distribution of Incomes of Corporations among Dividends,
Retained Eamings, and Taxes," American Economic Review, vol. 46 (May 1956, Papers
and Proceedings, 7955), pp. 97-113.

Robert J. Shiller

483

dends and stock prices may both be driven by the same social optimism
or pessimism, and the "overreaction" may simply reflect a greater
response to the fads in price than in dividends. The apparent response
of price to earnings could also be attributed to the same sort of effect to
the extent that reported earnings themselves are subject to the discretion
of accountants. Fisher Black has claimed that the change in accounting
practices through time might be described as striving to make earnings
an indicator of the value of the firm rather than the cash flow.^^ An
individual firm is substantially constrained in its accounting practices,
but the accounting profession's concept of conventional accounting
methods may be influenced by notions of what is the proper level of
aggregate earnings, and these notions may be influenced by social
optimism or pessimism.
The relation between real price and real dividend can be described
perhaps more satisfactorily from a distributed lag regression of P on D,
that is, a regression that predicts P as a weighted moving average of
current and lagged D. One sees from rows one and two of table I that
when the real price is regressed with a thirty-year distributed lag on
current and lagged real dividends, the current real dividend has a
coefficient greater than the average price-dividend ratio (22.6 for this
sample), and the sum ofthe coefficients ofthe lagged real dividends is
negative. The sum of all coefficients of real dividends, current and
lagged, is about the average price-dividend ratio. Thus, this equation
implies that the price tends to be unusually high when real dividends are
high relative to a weighted average of real dividends over the past thirty
years and low when dividends are low relative to this weighted average.
Rows 5 and 6 of table 1 show the same regression but with real
earnings as the independent variable. The coefficient of current earnings
is less than the average price-earnings ratio (13.0 for this sample).
Compared with dividends, earnings show more short-run variability;
therefore these results do not contradict a notion that prices overreact
to earnings as well as to dividends. The lower 7?^ in this regression might
be regarded as a reflection of the fact that dividends are not really well
described by the Lintner model, which made dividends a simple distributed lag on earnings."*' The R} is high enough that some major movements
in stock prices are explained by this regression. For example, the decline
48. See Fisher Black, * 'The Magic in Earnings: Economic Earnings versus Accounting
Earnings," Financial Analysts Journal {t^owQmhQX-Y^tctmbti 1980), pp. 19-24.
49. Ibid.

t<>

VD

ON

•

B

•

o

o

o

00

o

00

o

oo

I

Ss

—

o
o

NO

15::

vS

o

^I

—

3

o

o

1^

"I
ON

i

*

I

^
Oo

V :s

I

VO ON
VO OO

^

-Si

-Si

•2

•2

d 00

I
oo

ON

I

I

-^

4>

I

ON

I

oo 00

,^

o
I

I

^
ON

I
*~

•»...

ItillI

Ef

•HI

00

VO O\
•

I 'I

o <s o
II

I

o ^

I

ON

•

I

I

o —

^4 VO

•^ O

c> rj

d r^, d

I

O

B 3'*'

1

I

1

1
00

00

I

2

00

00

00

I
O

>«

Robert J. Shiller

485

in earnings between 1929 and 1933 explains more or less the decline in P
over that period (the regression had positive residuals in all these years).
While the reasons for the market decline on particular days in 1929 may
forever be a mystery, the overall market decline in the depression is
explained fairly well as a reaction (or an overreaction) to eamings.
It is important to investigate whether the pattem of coefficients in
rows 1 or 2 (or 5 or 6) of table 1 might be optimal given equation 1. The
easiest test of equation 1 suggested by the pattem of reaction of real
prices to real dividends documented here is to regress future retums on
current and lagged dividends. The efficient markets model of equation 1
implies that retums are unforecastable and the overreaction alternative
suggests that D can be used to forecast retums. Such a distributed lag
appears in row 3 of table 1. The coefficient of the current dividend is
negative and the sum ofthe coefficients ofthe remaining lagged dividends
is positive. Indeed, as our overreaction story would suggest, when
dividends are high relative to a weighted average of lagged dividends (so
that stocks are by this interpretation overpriced) there is a tendency for
low subsequent retums. An F-test on all coefficients but the constant
shows significance at the 5 percent level.^^ A similar pattem of coefficients found when E replaced D in the regression (row 7) suggests a
similar overreaction for eamings, but the result is significant only at the
9 percent level.
By looking at the time-series properties of real dividends, one can
better see why the pattem of reaction of prices to dividends causes
retums to be forecastable. The class of models by Box and Jenkins that
employ autoregressive integrated moving averages (ARIMA) has been
very popular, and it would be instructive to see how the real dividend
series could be represented by a model in this class.^^ Unfortunately,
time-series modeling methods are partly judgmental and do not lead all
researchers to the same model. In applying such methods one must
decide whether to detrend the data prior to data analysis. In previous
work I estimated a first order autoregressive model for the log of
50. Tests for heteroskedasticity as proposed by Glejser were run using D, time, and a
cubic polynomial in time as explanatory variables. Heteroskedasticity appeared remarkably absent in this regression. See H. Glejser, "A New Test for Heteroskedasticity,*'
Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 64 (March 1969), pp. 316-23.
51. George E. P. Box and Gwylim M. Jenkins, Time Series Analysis, Forecasting and
Conrro/(Oakland, Calif.: Holden-Day, 1977).

486

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

dividends around a deterministic linear trend. In this model, with the
same annual real dividend series used here, the coefficient of lagged log
dividends for 1872-1978 was 0.807, which implies that dividends always
would be predicted to return half the way to the trend in about three
years.^2 jhis result does not appear sensitive to the choice of price
deflator used to deflate dividends. Taking account ofthe downward bias
ofthe least squares estimate ofthe autoregressive coefficient, one can
reject by a Dickey-Fuller test at the 5 percent level the null hypothesis
of a random walk for log dividends in favor ofthe first order autoregressive model around a trend. Some, however, find models with a deterministic trend unappealing and prefer models that make dividends
nonstationary. With a model of nonstationary dividends one can handle
the apparent trend by first-differencing the data. The following model
was estimated with the real annual 1926-83 Standard and Poor's dividend
data.
(4)

AD, = 3.285 X 10-^ 4- 0.850AD,_, + u,
(1.498)
(11.753)
u, = a, -0.981a,_i,
(-69.434)

where at is a serially uncorrelated zero mean random variable. This is
what Box and Jenkins called an ARIM A (1,1,1) model. It merely asserts
that the change in real dividend is a linear function of its lagged value
plus an error term, u,, that is a moving average of a,. The r-statistics, in
parentheses, are misleading in that the likelihood function for this model
has other modes with almost the same likelihood but very different
parameter estimates. However, this model will suffice to tell how it might
be plausible, given the past behavior of dividends, to forecast future
dividends. This model cannot be rejected at usual significance levels
with the usual Ljung-Box Q-test. It is noteworthy that when the same
model was estimated with the sample period 1871-1925, almost the same
parameter values emerged: the coefficient of AZ);_i was 0.840 and the
coefficient of a, _ I was -0.973.
This estimated model is one that exhibits near parameter redundancy:
the coefficient of a,_i is so close to - 1 that the moving average on a,
52. See Robert J. Shiller, "The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market
Efficiency:' Journal of Finance, vol. 36 (May 1981), pp. 291-304.

Robert J. Shiller
487
almost cancels against the first-difference operator. In other words, this
model looks almost like a simple first order autoregressive model for
dividends with coefficient on the lagged dividend of 0.850. It is more
accurate to describe this model as a first order autoregressive model
around a moving mean that is itself a moving average of past dividends.
One can write the one-step-ahead optimal forecast of Dt implied by
equation 4 in the following form:
i = 0.869A + 0.13IM, + 0.173
t = (1-0.981)
where M, is a moving average of dividends with exponentially declining
weights that sum to one. Since 0.981 is so close to 1.00, the moving
average that defines M, is extremely long (0.981 even to the twenty-fifth
power is 0.619), and thus the term M, does not vary much over this
sample. Thus, for one-step-ahead forecasts this model is very similar to
afirstorder autoregressive model on detrended dividends.
If real dividends are forecasted in accordance with equation 5, then
equation 1 (with discount rate 8 = 0.080) would imply (using the chain
principle of forecasting) that stock prices should be a moving average of
dividends given by
(6)

Pr = 5.380A + 7.120M, + 11.628.

Note that the distant past has relatively more weight in determining the
price today (a weighted average of expected dividends into the infinite
future) than it does in determining the dividend next period. This model
thus accords with the intuitive notion that to forecast into the near future
one need look only at the recent past, but to forecast into the distant
future one need look into the distant past. Equation 6 implies that P,,
just as Dt, is an ARIMA (1,1,1) process.^^ If I had modeled the real
dividend series as a first-order autoregressive model around a trend,
then P, would be a weighted average of D, (with about the same weight
as in equation 6) and a trend.
Equation 6 is very different from the estimated relation between P
and D. The coefficient of Z>, in equation 6 is 5.380, which is far below the
53. For this result in a more general form, see John Y. Campbell, "Asset Duration and
Time-Varying Risk Premia" (Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University, 1984).

488

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

estimated value in rows 1 or 2 of table 1. The coefficients of the lagged
dividends sum to a positive number, not a negative number.
In summary, it appears that stock prices do not act, as they should,
like a smoothed transformation of dividends over the past few decades.
Instead dividends look like an amplification ofthe departure of dividends
from such a transformation. It is as if the optimism of investors is too
volatile, influenced by departures from trends rather than by the trends
themselves.
FORECASTING REGRESSIONS THAT EMPLOY DIVIDEND-PRICE
AND EARNINGS-PRICE RATIOS

The most natural test of equation 1 is to regress return R, on information available to the public at time t. Analogous tests of related models
might regress excess returns on information at time /, or regress riskcorrected retums on information at time t. If the F-statistic for the
regression (that is, for the null hypothesis that all coefficients save the
constant term are zero) is significant, then we will have rejected the
model. The simplest such tests use only price itself (scaled, say, by
dividing it into eamings or dividends) as an explanatory variable and use
the conventional r-statistic to test the model. If fads cause stocks to be
at times overpriced, at times underpriced, and if these fads come to an
end, then we would expect a high dividend-price or eamings-price ratio
to predict high returns and a low dividend-price or earnings-price ratio
to predict low returns. This would mean that the most naive investment
strategy, buy when price is low relative to dividends or earnings and sell
when it is high, pays off.
However, it is not easy to carry out such simple tests. One confronts
a number of econometric problems: the independent variable is not
'*nonstochastic," so that ordinary r-statistics are not strictly valid; the
error term appears nonnormal or at least conditionally heteroskedastic;
and risk correction, if it is employed, is not a simple matter. There is no
agreed-upon way to deal with such problems, and I will not attempt here
to deal rigorously with them. It is, however, worthwnile to note that high
dividend-price or eamings-price ratios do seem to be correlated with
high retums.
Whether stocks with a high eamings-price ratio will have a relatively
high retum has been the subject of much discussion in the literature. It
was confirmed that there is a simple correlation across firms between

Robert J. Shiller

489

such ratios and returns.^'' The question then arose, Can such a phenomenon be explained within the framework of the capital asset pricing
model if there happens to be a positive correlation between the ratio and
the beta ofthe stocks, or does firm size, which correlates with the ratio,
affect expected returns? Recently, Sanjoy Basu concluded that riskadjusted returns are positively correlated with the earnings-price ratio
even after controlling for firm size.^^ As Basu notes, however, his tests
depend on the risk measurement assumed.
It is apparently accepted today in the finance profession that expected
returns fluctuate through time as well as across stocks. These results are
interpreted as describing the time variation in the '*risk premium.''
The dividend/price ratio or earnings/price ratio has not figured prominently in this literature. Instead the variables chosen for forecasting
were such things as the infiation rate,^^ the spread between low-grade
and high-grade bonds," or the spread between long-term and short-term
bonds.5^
Table 2 shows that a high dividend-price ratio (total Standard and
Poor's dividends for the preceding year divided by the Standard and
Poor's composite index for July of the preceding year) is indeed an
indicator of high subsequent returns.^^ Thus, for example, the equation
in row 1 asserts that when the dividend-price ratio (or "current yield")
is one percentage point above its mean, the expected return on the stock
is 3.588 percentage points above its mean. Thus, the high current yield
is augmented by an expected capital gain that is two and a half times as
dramatic as the high current yield. In contrast, equation 1 would predict
that a high current yield should correspond to an expected capital loss
54. See for example Francis Nicholson, "Price Ratios in Relation to Investment
Results,'' Financial Analysts Journal, vol. 24 (January-February 1968), pp. 105-09.
55. See Sanjoy Basu, "The Relationship between Earnings' Yield, Market Value and
Return for NYSE Common Stocks: Further Evidence," JoMrna/ of Financial Economics,
vol. 12 (June 1983), pp. 129-56.
56. See Eugene F. Fama and G. William Schwert, "Asset Retums and Inflation,"
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 5 (November 1977), pp. 115-46.
57. See Donald B. Keim and Robert F. Stambaugh, "Predicting Retums in the Stock
and Bond Markets," University of Pennsylvania, 1984.
58. See John Y. Campbell, "Stock Retums and the Term Structure" (Princeton
University, 1984).
59. There is evidence that the strategy of holding stocks with high dividend-price ratios
has actually paid off for those investors who followed it. See Wilbur G. Lewellen, Ronald
C. Lease, and Gary C. Schlarbaum, "Investment Performance and Investor Behavior,"
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 14 (March 1979), pp. 29-57.

490

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

Table 2. Forecasting Returns Based on the Dividend-Price Ratio, Selected Periods,
1872-1983'
Sample statistic

Constant

Coefficient
of dividendprice ratio

1872-1983"

-0.10
(-1.52)

3.59
(2.85)

0.06

1.85

0.17

1872-1908"

-0.02
(-0.20)

2.26
(0.96)

0.00

2.05

0.14

1909-45"

-0.14
(-0.88)

3.89
(1.42)

0.03

1.46

0.21

1946-83"

-0.16
(-1.70)

5.23
(2.62)

0.14

1.80

0.17

1889-1982=

-0.13
(-1.94)

4.26
(3.15)

0.09

1.85

0.17

1926-82'!

-0.17
(-1.73)

5.26
(2.71)

0.10

2.01

0.21

Sample
period

R^

DurbinWatson

Standard
error

a. Numbers in parentheses are r-statistics. The stock price index throughout is the Standard and Poor's composite
stock price index. The dependent variable is the real return on the stock price index from January of the year to
January of the following year (average for the month) except where otherwise noted. The retum is the sum of the
change in the stock price index plus Standard and Poor's four-quarter total of the composite dividends per share as
adjusted to the stock price index, all divided by the stock price index. The independent variable is total dividends
in the preceding year (which is Standard and Poor's four-quarter total of the composite dividends as adjusted to the
stock price index) divided by the stock price index for July of the preceding year.
b. Price deflator is the producer price index.
c. Price deflator is the consumption deflator for nondurables and services.
d. Nominal retums were cumulated for the end of January until the end of January of the following year from
monthly data in "Common Stocks Total Retums." Roger Ibbotson and Associates; the price deflator is the January
producer price index.

to offset the current yield. The efficient markets hypothesis thus appears
dramatically wrong from this regression: stock prices move in a direction
opposite to that forecasted by the dividend-price ratio. This is true in
every subperiod examined.^
In table 3, rows 1 through 5 show analogous regressions with the
earnings-price ratio (total Standard and Poor's earnings for the preceding
year divided by the Standard and Poor's composite index for July ofthe
preceding year) in place of the dividend-price ratio. These forecasting
regressions work in the same direction (price low relative to eamings
implies high returns) but are less significant.^'
60. The same regressions were run using a different price deflator (row five of table 2)
and a different measure of retum (row six of table 2) with little change in results.
61. The lower significance appears to be due to the relatively noisy behavior ofthe
annual eamings series. If the eamings-price ratio is computed as the average annual
Standard and Poor's eamings for the preceding thirty years divided by the Standard and

491

Robert J. Shiller

Table 3. Forecasting Returns Based on the Earnings-Price Ratio, Selected Periods,
1872-1983*

Sample
period

Constant

Coefficient
of earningsprice ratio

Sample statistic

R-

DurbinWatson

Standard
error

1872-1983

0.01
(0.24)

0.85
(1.41)

0.01

1.90

0.18

1872-1908

0.00
(0.02)

1.28
(0.63)

-0.02

2.16

0.15

1909-45

0.08
(0.72)

0.03
(0.02)

-0.03

1.59

0.21

1946-83

-0.09
(-1.09)

1.86
(2.13)

0.09

1.71

0.17

0.01
(0.19)

0.78
(1.24)

0.01

1.96

0.18

-0.04
(-0.68)

1.57=
(2.38)

0.05

1.81

0.19

1889-1982
1901-83"

a. Numbers in parentheses are /-statistics. Dependent and independent variables and price deflators are as in table
2, with eamings in place of dividends.
b. Price deflator is the producer price index.
c. Earnings-price ratio is computed by forming the average real eamings for the previous thirty years (not counting
the cufTent year) and then dividing by the real stock price index for January of the current year.

EXCESS VOLATILITY OF STOCK PRICES

Regression tests ofthe efficient markets model may not fully characterize the way in which the model fails. A simpler and perhaps more
appealing way to see the failure ofthe model represented by equation 1
follows by observing that stock prices seem to show far too much
volatility to be in accordance with the simple model.^^The most important
criticism ofthe excess volatility claim centers on the claim's assumption
that stock prices are stationary around a trend ofthe dividend series.^^
Here I discuss the volatility tests in light of this criticism and present
Poor's composite index for January ofthe current year (row six of table 3), then the relation
between retums and the earnings-price ratio looks more impressive.
62. The arguments for excess volatility in financial markets were put forth independently by Stephen F. LeRoy and Richard D. Porter, "The Present-Value Relation: Tests
Based on Implied Variance Bounds," Econometrica, vol. 49 (March 1981), pp. 555-74,
and by me in several papers beginning with "The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates
and Expectations Models ofthe Term Structure," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 87
(December 1979), pp. 1190-1219, and in "Do Stock Prices Move too Much."
63. In the case of LeRoy and Porter, the eamings series, instead ofthe dividend series,
was assumed to be stationary.

492

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

tests in a slightly different form that deals better with the issue of
nonstationarity.
I showed that if the dividend D, is a stationary stochastic process,
then the efficient markets model (equation 1) implies the variance
inequality
(7)

" (28)0-5

that is, that the standard deviation ofthe change in price P - P.iis less
than or equal to the standard deviation ofthe dividend D divided by the
square root of twice the discount factor.^ If we know the standard
deviation of D, then there is a limit to how much P - P.i can vary if
equation 1 is to hold at all times. If the market is efficient, then price
movements representing changes in forecasts of dividends cannot be
very large unless dividends actually do move a lot. The discount factor
8 is equal to the expected return £(/?,), which can be estimated by taking
the average return. Before we can use this inequality to test the efficient
markets model, we must somehow deal with the fact that dividends
appear to have a trend; in an earlier paper, I handled the problem by
multiplying prices and dividends by an exponential decay factor as a
way to detrend them. This method of detrending has become a source
of controversy. Indeed, as I noted in the original paper, the trend in
dividends may be spurious, and dividends may have another sort of
nonstationarity that is not removed by such detrending.^^ Thus, violating
inequality 7 in these tests should not be regarded by itself as definitive
evidence against equation 1. Most ofthe criticism ofthe variance-bounds
inequality has centered on this point.^ On the other hand, the violation
of the variance inequality does show that dividend volatility must be
potentially much greater than actually observed historically (around a
trend or around the historical mean) if the efficient markets model is to
64. Shiller, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much."
65. ShiUer, "The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates."
66. For example, see Maijorie A. Flavin, "Excess Volatility in the Financial Markets:
A Reassessment of the Empirical Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91
(December 1983), pp. 929-56; Allan W. Kleidon, "Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price
Valuation Models" (Stanford University, Graduate School of Business, 1983); and Terry
A. Marsh and Robert C. Merton, "Dividend Variability and Variance Bounds Tests for
the Rationality of Stock Market Prices," Working Paper 1584-84 (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Alfred P. Sloan School of Management, August 1984).

Robert J. Shiller

493

Table 4. Sample Statistics for Detrended Price and Dividend Series, Selected Periods,
1871-1984'
Sample
period
1877-1984
1887-1984
1902-1984

Left-hand side of
inequality

Right-hand side of
inequality

(T{P5 - P5-i)
= 2.83
(T{P\5 - P15_,) = 2.93
a(/'3O - F30_,) = 3.39

tT(£>5)/(28)"^ = 3.52
a(I>15)/(28)"^ = 1.64
a(D30)/(28)°' = 1.38

Source: Equations 7-10.
a. The variables P5, PIS, and ^30 are the real stock price index detrended by dividing by the 5-year, 15-year, and
30-year geometric average of lagged real earnings respectively; a denotes sample standard deviation. The variables
DS, D\S, and D30 are the corresponding dividend series as defined in the text. The constant 6 equals 0.08. the
average real retum on the Standard and Poor's composite stock price index over the entire period 1871-1983.

hold; and this fact can be included among other factors in judging the
plausibility ofthe efficient markets model.
Table 4 displays the elements of the above inequality but with the
data detrended in a different and perhaps more satisfactory manner that
depends only on past information. Let us define detrended price series
P5, P15, and P30 and corresponding dividend series D5,D\5, and D30
by
(8)

P,

Pk,

isKf

fc = 5,15,30

and
k
'

( 1

^' + P
Nk,
• "\Nk,

1

Nk,J

\

= 5-'5.30,

where
k

(10)

Nk,=

11

'^t-j

* = 5, 15,30.

The detrended price and dividend series have the following property:
returns calculated with Pk and Dk in place of P and D in the formula for
retum R, are the same as if P and D had been used. Thus, if equation 1
holds for P, and D,, then equation 1 holds where Pk, and Dk, replace P,
and D,, and the same variance inequality 7 should hold for Pk and Dk.
One can think of Pk and Dk as the price and dividend, respectively, of a
share in a mutual fund that holds the same fixed portfolio (whose price
is P, and whose dividend is D,) but buys back or sells its own shares so
that it always has Nk, shares outstanding. The variable Nk, is a geometric
moving average of lagged real earnings. This may cause the dividend of
the mutual fund to be stationary even if the dividend Dt is not. A plot of

494

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

D30, for example, shows no apparent trend and does not look unstationary. If, for example, the natural log of £ is a Gaussian random walk and
is thus nonstationary, and if D, = £,, then Pkf will be a stationary
lognormal process, and Dk, will be the sum of stationary lognormal
processes.^^ We see from table 4 that inequality 7 is not violated for
^ = 5 but is violated for ^ = 15 and k = 30. The detrending factor Nk,
gets smoother as k increases.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE FORECASTING EQUATIONS
IN CONNECTION WITH THE MODEL

If we choose hypothetical values for p and cp in equation 2, we can use
one ofthe equations forecasting/?, and produced in tables 1 through 3 to
estimate the paths through time of Qt and Yt. Such an estimate will be
admittedly quite arbitrary, and of course these forecasting regressions
are not prima facie evidence that it would be "smart" to behave as will
be supposed here. Considering such an estimate may nonetheless give
some insights into the plausibility of the alternative model. We leam
immediately in doing this that 9 must be very large if swings in Qt, the
proportion of shares held by smart-money investors, are not to be
extraordinarily large. This problem arises because stock prices are
actually quite forecastable: the standard deviation ofthe expected return
implied in many of the forecasting equations is so large that unless 9 in
equation 2 is large, g, will often move far out ofthe zero-to-one range.
Figure 2 shows a hypothetical example with estimated values of F,
and Qt implied by equation 2 and the forecasting equation based on the
dividend-price ratio in row 1 of table 2 for p = 0 and cp = 0.5. Also
shown is the real price P,. For these values of p and <p, g, is always
positive and thus Yt is always less than P,. The demand for shares by
ordinary investors, F,, looks on the whole fairly similar to the price P,
itself. This arises because the forecasting equation is related to the
dividend-price ratio and because dividends are fairly sluggish, so that Qt
itself resembles the reciprocal of P^ However, Yt is somewhat more
volatile than P,, showing a tendency to be lower proportionally at lows
67. If log D, - log A-1 = u,, where u is serially uncorrelated and normal with zero
mean and variance s^, then £, A+* = A/«*. where h = exp(j2/2). Calling g = 1/(1 + 8), then
ifhg<\,ii
follows from equation 1 that P, = gD,/(\ - hg). Substituting this into equation
8 and using equation 10 will provide the stationarity result for PA: and Dk noted in the text.

495

Robert J. Shiller
Figure 2. Hypothetical Demand for Shares by Ordinary Investors
and Smart-Money Investors
100

Ordinary investors' demand for shares**
0

Smart-money investors' demand for shares

1926

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1984

a. Real stock price index (/*,), as described in figure I, notes a and b.
b. The hypotheticaJ demand for shares by ordinary investors, equal to P^\ - Q,). where Q, is the hypothetical
demand Tor shares by smart-money investors.
c. The variable Q, from equation 2 with p = 0 and if = O.S and based on the forecasting equation for retums in
row 1 of table 2.

and higher proportionally at highs. The overreaction to dividends is
more pronounced in F, than in P,. The presence of smart money thus
serves to mitigate the overreaction of ordinary investors. The year 1933
stands out for a very large proportion of smart-money investors and a
low proportion of ordinary investors. This was the year when the
dividend-price ratio reached an extreme high and when the highest
retums were forecasted. The late 1950s and early 1960s were times of
low demand by smart-money investors: the dividend-price ratio was low

496

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

then and so they were "smart" ex ante to get out ofthe market, though
of course ex post they would have liked to have stayed in the market.
The demand by smart money is currently neither high nor low because
the dividend-price ratio is not far from its historical average. The
weighted average return (IQ,R,/1,Q,) for 1926 to 1983 was 12.9 percent,
in contrast to the average return (mean of R,) for this period of 8.2
percent.
The volume of trade implied by the movements in and out of shares
by smart money between t and / + 1 is | Q/+1 - Q/ |; the average value
of this measure for the sample shown infigure2 is 0.055. In this sample,
the New York Stock Exchange turnover rate (reported annual share
volume divided by average of shares listed) was between 9 percent (1942)
and 42 percent (1982), except for the early depression years, when
turnover was extremely high.^ Thus, the story told infigure2 is not one
of an implausibly high volume of trade. Because corporate stock constitutes less than one-third of all wealth, we are also not talking about
implausibly large wealth movements on the part of smart money.^' Of
course, not all household wealth is very liquid. The ratio ofthe market
value of corporate equities to deposits and credit market instruments
held by households ranged from 47.7 percent in 1948 to 136.2 percent in
1968.70

The results shown in figure 2 are not insensitive to the choice of
forecasting equation, though as long as the forecasting equation is a
simple regression on the dividend/price ratio (as in table 2), changing the
equation has no more effect than changing p and (p. If an equation that
forecasts with the earnings/price ratio (row six of table 3) is used to
compute Efit^ the pattern through time of Q is somewhat different: Q is
still high (though not as high infigure2) in 1933 and low in the late 1950s
and early 1960s. The weighted average return for smart money over this
period would be 11.4 percent.
A discount rate p -I- tp of 50 percent in equation 3 may or may not
68. New York Stock Exchange, Fact Book 1983, p. 68.
69. Between 1945 and 1980 corporate shares held by households and private financial
institutions as a proportion of household net worth including tangibles and govemment
debt ranged from 12.6 percent in 1948 to 31.8 percent in 1968. See Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheets for U.S. Economy (Washington, D.C, April
1981), table 700, "Consolidated Domestic Net Assets with Tangibles at Current Cost,
1945-1980."
70. Ibid.

Robert J. Shiller

497

imply very forecastable retums, depending on the stochastic properties
of Yi. In the hypothetical example, the behavior of Y, is sufficiently
dominated by long (low-frequency) components that returns are not
more forecastable than would be implied by the forecasting regression
in table 2. A discount rate of 50 percent per year amounts to about 0.1
percent per day (compared to the standard deviation of daily retum of
about 1 percentage point), so that for event studies involving daily stock
price data the discount rate is still very small. If equation 3 were to be
applied to individual stocks, we might choose a smaller value of 9 and
hence a smaller discount rate.

Summary and Conclusion

Much of this paper relies on the reader's good judgment. A great deal
of evidence is presented here that suggests that social movements,
fashions, or fads are likely to be important or even the dominant cause
of speculative asset price movements; but no single piece of evidence is
unimpeachable.
The most important reason for expecting that stock prices are heavily
influenced by social dynamics comes from observations of participants
in the market and of human nature as presented in the literature on social
psychology, sociology, and marketing. A study ofthe history ofthe U.S.
stock market in the postwar period suggests that various social movements were under way during this period that might plausibly have major
effects on the aggregate demand for shares. Must we rely on such
evidence to make the case against market efficiency? Yes; there is no
alternative to human judgment in understanding human behavior.
The reason that the random-walk behavior of stock prices holds up
as well as it does may be two-fold. First, the aggregate demand of
ordinary investors may itself not be entirely unlike a random walk.
Fashions are perhaps inherently rather unpredictable, and ordinary
investors may overreact to news of eamings or dividends, which behavior
may also make their demand relatively unpredictable.
Second, and on the other hand, as shown by the model in equation 3
the ordinary investors' predictable patterns of behavior are prevented
from causing big short-run profit opportunities by the limited amount of
smart money in the economy, so that returns may be nearly unpredict-

498

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984

able, and tests of market efficiency may have little power. However, in
preventing large profit opportunities the smart money may not be
preventing the ordinary investors from causing major swings in the
market and even being the source of volatility in the market.
Data on stock prices show evidence of overreaction to dividends, and
the forecasting equations for retums are consistent with such overreaction. However, an altemative interpretation for the correlation of prices
to dividends might be thatfirmsthat set dividends are influenced by the
same social dynamics that influence the rest of society. There are also
other possible interpretations of this correlation; that is why I presented
the data analysis as merely confirming that notions of overreaction
suggested by qualitative evidence are consistent with the data.
It should also be emphasized that the model in equation 3 involves a
present value of expected dividends and that it shares some properties
ofthe efficient markets model. Despite all the inadequacies ofthe notion
of market efficiency, modem theoreticalfinancedoes offer many insights
into actual market behavior. The robustness ofthe models to variations
like those here is a matter deserving more attention.

