Conversation, Information, and Herd Behavior
Author(s): Robert J. Shiller
Source: The American Economic Review , May, 1995, Vol. 85, No. 2, Papers and
Proceedings of the Hundredth and Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Economic
Association Washington, DC, January 6-8, 1995 (May, 1995), pp. 181-185
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2117915
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2117915?seq=1&cid=pdfreference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Economic
Review

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Sun, 28 Feb 2021 16:37:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

RHETORIC AND ECONOMIC BEHAVIORt

Conversation, Information, and Herd Behavior
By ROBERT J. SHILLER*
People who interact with each other regularly tend to think and behave similarly.
Sometimes this "herd behavior" is so striking as to suggest a puzzle. Why, for example, should political beliefs or opinions on
policy issues such as gun control tend to
show such geographical and social patterns?
The facts that should inform beliefs are the
same everywhere. For another example, why
should at certain times consumer and investor confidence be high and at other times
low? Often, economists cannot discern any
logic to changes in public confidence.
The tendency for people in groups to
think and behave similarly seems to suggest
some kind of irrationality, such as a loyaltyinduced psychological motivation to be in
accord with group members (see John Jost,

I will discuss two approaches to understanding why groups at different places or
times have access to different information
sets. One approach is represented by models in which people acquire information by
observing actions of others in their group,
the "informational cascade" models of
Abhijit Banerjee (1992) and of Sushil
Bikhchandani et al. (1992). Another approach is to study the mechanisms of transmittal of information within groups, using
the "conversation analysis" of anthropologists (see Charles Goodwin and John
Heritage, 1990) and the studies of "sociocognition" of social psychologists (see John
Levine and Lauren Resnick 1993).

1995). But more seems to be at work than
just such a motivation. One is struck, in
talking to people, that they act purposefully,
bring up facts to support their views, and
often seem unaware of opposing arguments.
For understanding herd behavior, it is
helpful also to consider theories of information, theories that represent each group as

and the Herd Externality

I. Informational Cascades

The models of Banerjee (1992) and
Bikhchandani et al. (1992) both show people acquiring information in sequence by
observing the actions of other individuals in
their group who precede them in the sequence. Banerjee introduces his model in
terms of an example of people's efforts to
reacting to an information set common to
discover which of two restaurants is better,
that group. The kinds of opinions for which
where each person has an imperfect signal
herd behavior is prominent are not matters
of plain fact (which way is north), but subtle about the quality of the restaurants. The
first individual follows his or her own signal.
matters, for which many pieces of informaThose who come after may rationally ignore
tion are relevant, and for which limitations
their own signals, deciding that these signals
of time and natural intelligence prevent each
individual from individually discovering all
are dominated by the information revealed
by their predecessors' decisions to go to one
relevant information.
of the restaurants. Everyone could wind up
going to the wrong restaurant, if the first
signal is bad. The bad equilibrium arises
from a "herd externality," of imitating othtDiscussants: Catherine Bateson, George Mason
ers and thereby concealing one's own inforUniversity; Thomas Schelling, University of Maryland.
mation.
*Cowles Foundation, Yale University, New Haven
That people do indeed try seriously to
CT 06520-8281. I thank David Hirshleifer and John
infer
information by observing the actions
Jost for helpful discussions. National Science Foundaof others has been documented. Solomon
tion support is gratefully acknowledged.
181

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Sun, 28 Feb 2021 16:37:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

182

AEA

PAPERS

AND

PROCEEDINGS

MAY

1995

Asch (1952) reported a (now famous) experists, following the first subject who for some
iment that has been widely interpreted as
reason is inaccurate" (p. 462), or that the
demonstrating the power of social pressure,
other subjects were vulnerable to an "optibut that might better be regarded as an
cal illusion" that the experimenter had deexperiment demonstrating that people ravised. This theorizing on the part of the
tionally take into account the information
subject is evidence of an apparently rational
revealed by others' actions. In each of these
effort to interpret the conflicting evidence.
experiments, Asch placed a subject in a
Very soon after the publication of Asch's
group of people, the other members of
experiment, critics realized the importance
which were confederates. The group was
of the informational interpretation of Asch's
asked to answer a sequence of 12 questions
results. Morton Deutsch and Harold
about the lengths of line segments; the anGerard (1955) reported experiments modifyswers to all questions were obvious and
ing the Asch experiment by separating the
were nearly always correctly answered when
group members, so that there was no interpresented to individual respondents outside
personal interaction. The subject was seated
of a group. In each experiment the confedin a partitioned area so that other group
erates were told to give an incorrect answer
members could not be seen and was told to
on seven of the 12 questions. The subjects,
enter the answer by pushing a button, which
reacting to the conflict between their own
lit a bulb visible to the subject and, presumsenses and the unanimous consensus of the
ably, bulbs visible to the other group memrest of the group, showed evidence of anxibers. The supposed answers of the other
ety and distress, and in a third of their
group members were made known to the
responses then made the same error as the
subject by the lighting of other bulbs supmajority.
posedly operated by these members. In fact,
There is an alternative to the social-presthe bulbs were secretly controlled by the
sure interpretation of Asch's results, an inexperimenter to imply that other group
formation-based interpretation. A rational
members were giving wrong answers. Thus,
subject might well reason that, under the
the informational aspects of the situation
assumption that the answer to the question
are essentially the same as in Asch's; only
is as obvious as it seems, the probability that
the face-to-face interactiQn is eliminated.
someone would make an error should be
The subjects here made almost as many
very small, one in a hundred, let us say. The
errors (84 percent as many) as in the faceprobability that the other eight group memto-face experiment, indicating that the inbers would make the same error, if all are
formational effects, not the social effects,
independent, would be one in a hundred to
were the predominant cause of Asch's rethe eighth power, an extremely small numsults, and allowing the famous Asch experiber. The subject might then reason that
ment to be reinterpreted as revealing inforconclusive evidence has been presented that
mation-based behavior.
he or she is incompetent to answer the
The Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani
question. Curiously, Asch seemed not fully
et al. (1992) papers add to the understandaware of this informational interpretation,
ing of this informational herd behavior by
even though he quoted subjects as practiillustrating through their models the general
cally explaining this to him after the experi-equilibrium effects, and the social-welfare
ment. One subject told him that "To me it
and policy implications of such rational imiseems I'm right, but my reason tells me I'm
tation of others. There is some doubt, howwrong, because I doubt that so many people
ever, as to whether these authors have
could be wrong and I alone right" (Asch,
properly identified the usual source of dif1952 p. 464). The subjects told Asch of a
ference in behavior across groups. The reanumber of theories they tried to construct
son that one group behaves differently from
to explain the conflict between their own
another in their models is that the first
perceptions and those of the group, such as
movers in the sequence in each group rethat the actions are not independent, "the
ceived different (partly random) signals.
othe.r memhers of the mniaritv are conform-

While such seouential decision-making does

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Sun, 28 Feb 2021 16:37:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 85 NO. 2 RHETORIC AND ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR 183

occur (consider the example of John Leahey
[1994] on the location of new stores on Sixth
Avenue), in most cases many people independently choose their actions based on
their own signals, without observing the actions of others. By the law of averages, one
would expect that the group behavior is
determined by the information, not the random signals.
It would seem that few of the examples of
informational cascades proposed by Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al. (1992)
satisfy the assumptions of the sequential
models. Banerjee gives the examples of
choice of stores, schools, investments, political candidates, technologies, how many children to have, and research topics (for
academics). Bikhchandani et al. offer, as
additional examples of herd behavior, drug,
alcohol and cigarette use, war fever, cohabitation, communism, religions, choice of papers by editors, choice of initial public offerings, medical practice (tonsillectomies or
hysterectomies), and health fads. For most
of these, it is hard to see how there could be
a first mover who set the behavior of others.
Returning to Banerjee's introductory example, of restaurant choice; it seems unlikely
that restaurants succeed or fail for reasons
represented in his model. There are too

many "first movers" who try the restaurant
without having observed others, or not
trusting that others' decisions are relevant
to their own.

cation, so that communication is not only
possible, but also so effective and frequent.
Human society has had an evolutionary advantage in its ability to act as a unit, to
respond collectively to information. Group
members must therefore exchange information among themselves before a crisis
happens; they must promote a collective
memory of important facts, common assumptions, and conventions. The human
communication patterns work very well and
must account for part of the success of the
human species in competition with other
animals. Still, one would not expect to see
that evolution has completed the job yet,
and so sometimes collective behavior is likely
to be inappropriate or counterproductive.
Human behavior common to all human
societies involves a tendency for an idle
free-flowing exchange of ideas and thoughts;
we call this "conversation." This flow of
conversation serves to exchange a wide variety of information, and also to reinforce
memories of pieces of information to be
held in common by the group. Modern civilization has brought with it some more
structured environments for exchange of in-

formation (academic seminars or meetings
held under Robert's Rules of Order, for
example), but such structured environments
are still dominated by ordinary conversation
that follows ancient patterns. The communications media of modern society are of
course not governed by all the same rules as
is ordinary interpersonal conversation. Still,

Conversation

there is a sense of conversation in the media, and many of the same patterns continue in these media. Moreover, the media

Human speech developed through millions of years of evolution. The develop-

appear to be somewhat less effective in
transmitting information and opinions than

ment of speech required the expansion of

ordinary interpersonal conversation (see
e.g., William McGuire, 1995). Perhaps the
media do not provide stimuli to all of the
brain processes that evolved to make use of

II. Interpersonal Communications:

certain areas of the brain that make it possible. Broca's area in the brain developed to
allow the fine control of muscles of the
mouth and larynx; Wernicke's area developed to process the incoming speech of
others; other areas developed to allow the
storage of words and to connect the memory of words to logical thought processes.
Along with the patterns of speech itself,
there has evolved a complex set of brain
structures supporting emotional and interpersonal behaviors that facilitate communi-

face-to-face conversation.
Associated with conversation are a number of emotional responses to what is said,
and an awareness of the emotional responses of others, responses that presumably promote the exchange of information.
In the course of a conversation, normal
people at frequent intervals become aware
of feelings of emotional support from the

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Sun, 28 Feb 2021 16:37:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

184

AEA

PAPERS

AND

other party, or feelings of being put down,
of loss of face, and they attempt to deal
politely with these feelings.
Anthropologists have documented, with
their "conversation analysis," patterns of
conversation that appear to transcend all
cultures and are apparently part of the basic
behavior patterns of the human animal.
Penelope Brown and Stephen Levinson
(1987) have reported extensive crosscultural similarities in behavior regarding
politeness in conversation. For a specific
example of such a behavior, note that in
many languages there are words that serve
to soften an imperative. In the English sentence "My house would be OK then?" the
word "then" serves such a function, helping
the other party save face, if he or she wishes
to object to the suggestion, by creating a
supposition that the idea in the sentence
had been suggested by something that person had said earlier in the conversation.
Brown and Levinson report that the word
"appuram" in the Tamil language of India
and the word "o'in" in the Tzeltal language
of Mexico are used for precisely the same
purpose (p. 115).
One of the rules of polite conversation is
respect for a common consensus on the
topic of conversation. Somehow, a set of
topics commonly sanctioned as appropriate
for conversation becomes established in
groups. Topics that might exclude members
of the group, or reveal their inadequacies,
are less likely to be broached. Not only are
there socially sanctioned rules for appropriate topics of conversation, but also, in the
course of a conversation, it is impolite to
make an abrupt change of topic even to
another socially sanctioned topic. To make
a change of topic one must usually create
some link to the previous topic, or one must
drift to another topic in a stepwise fashion.
The protocol creates a fluid, apparently random drift of topic of conversation but does
not allow for the expansion of complicated
ideas. The protocol of conversation usually
dictates that no single person dominates the
conversation, and so knowledgeable persons
usually do not have opportunities to give
lectures, even if such lectures would greatly
inform the others.

PROCEEDINGS

MAY1995

The consequence of these conversation
behaviors is to keep people well informed
about simple facts about the local environment, where to get things and where there
are hazards, how simple tasks are performed, about family and friendship ties,
about local gossip, about who is deviant and
not to be trusted. Abstract topics are not
usually pursued in depth.
Many of the failures of human judgment
that fall under the rubric of "herd behavior"
might be traced to the limitations imposed
on human thought and memory by these
patterns of communications. For an economic example, consider that savings rates
differ strikingly across countries (e.g., United
States vs. Japan) and through time. It appears that the question "Are we saving
enough?" is a suitable conversation topic
beyond spousal pairs in almost no circumstances. Problems of face seem to be important; there is a potential for embarrassment
if matters of wealth are brought up, and
moreover, the topic is rather abstract and
difficult, so discussions of it would exclude
or diminish many people. Instead, appropriate behavior toward saving is learned from
hints and rules of thumb inferred within
each group from conversations centered on
other matters.

The "monetary veil," "money illusion,"
and the failure of "Ricardian equivalence"
are also inappropriate topics. The topic of
whether the national debt should be regarded as wealth is just not suitable for
discussions outside of economics department coffee hours, as is the topic of how
much we should diversify our portfolios and
hedge risks. Opinions on these matters thus
ought also to vary through time and across
groups.

III. Information and the Volatility
of Mass Behavior

What is the source of the volatility of
mass behavior, the source of apparent randomness in actions and behavior across
groups and through time? I have argued

that, while informational cascades appear to
be very important, the first-mover aspect
of the stories of Banerjee (1992) and

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Sun, 28 Feb 2021 16:37:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

VOL. 85 NO. 2 RHETORIC AND ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR 185

Bikhchandani et al. (1992) seems not to be
widely applicable.
The differences in mass behavior across
groups may be due more to differences
across groups in the nature of information
transmission. Different groups (or groups
at different times) have different tendencies
-different in terms of conversation patterns as well as circumstances promoting
informational cascades-to transmit certain
kinds of information and thereby place it in
their collective memories. Ihe outcome for
collective memory may differ across groups
even if the information is repeatedly observed by some members of all groups.
A large part of the difference across
groups in information transmission on any

single topic must be due to differences in
initial conditions in terms of information
and opinions of that group. Knowing the
beliefs and attitudes of the people in their
group, people freely bring up information
only if it is a suitable conversation topic for
that group and will not diminish or exclude
anyone. Moreover, stimuli to conversation
are different across groups; each group has
its own reminders of conversation topics.
For example, given the basic human tendency to converse about people known in
common, the association of a prominent
group member with certain ideas may speed
their transmission.
Groups may differ in complicated ways in
terms of what may be called informational
cascade facilitators. For example, some
groups may tend to observe the behavior of
others in relation to certain kinds of information more often than other groups, or
have different theories about the relevance
of other group members' decisions for their
own decision problem. Conversation patterns may also vary across groups in terms
of habits of revealing sources of information. A seemingly inessential group tendency to reveal or not reveal where one
heard a seemingly improbable story may
make an important difference in the kind of

informational cascades that develop in conversation. If one knows that one more reliable person believed the story enough to
tell it, then one would logically have more
tendency to believe it and spread it. Much
research could be done documenting differences across groups in such dimensions.
REFERENCES

Asch, Solomon. Social psychology. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1952.
Banerjee, Abhiit V. "A Simple Model of Herd
Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1992, 107(3), pp. 797-817.
Bikhchandani, Sushil; Hirshleifer, David and

Welch, Ivo. "A Theory of Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change." Journal of
Political Economy, October 1992, 100(5),
pp. 992-1026.
Brown, Penelope and Levinson, Stephen C. Politeness: Some universals in language usage.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1987.

Deutsch, Morton and Gerard, Harold B. "A
Study of Normative and Informational Social Influences upon Individual
Judgment." Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, November 1955, 51(3),
pp. 629-36.
Goodwin, Charles and Heritage, John. "Conversation Analysis." Annual Review of
Anthropology, 1990, 19, pp. 283-307.
Jost, John T. "Negative Illusions: Conceptual
Clarification and Psychological Evidence
Concerning False Consciousness." Political Psychology, 1995 (forthcoming).
Leahey, John. "Miracle on Sixth Avenue."
Mimeo, Harvard University, 1994.
Levine, John M. and Resnick, Lauren B. "Social
Foundations of Cognition." Annual Review of Psychology, 1993, 44, pp. 585-612.
McGuire, William J. "Attitudes and Attitude
Change," in Gardner Lindzey and Elliott
Aronson, eds., Handbook of social
psychology, Vol. 2. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1985, pp. 233-346.

This content downloaded from
73.173.145.14 on Sun, 28 Feb 2021 16:37:20 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

