Journal

of Economic

Behavior

and Organization

12 (1989) 47-66.

North-Holland

SURVEY EVIDENCE ON DIFFUSION
OF INTEREST
INFORMATION
AMONG INVESTORS*

AND

021Robert J. SHILLER
Yale University, New Haven. CT 06520, USA

John POUND
Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138, USA
Received August

1987, tinal version

received

September

1988

Questionnaire
surveys of institutional
and individual
investors were undertaken
to learn about
patterns of communications.
It was found that direct interpersonal
communications
are very
important
in investor decisions. Questions elicited what fraction of investors were unsystematic
and allowed themselves to be influenced by word-of-mouth
communications
or other salient
stimuli. Randomly sampled investors were studied as well as investors in stocks whose price had
recently increased dramatically.
Contagion
or epidemic models of financial markets are proposed
in which interest in individual
stocks is spread by word of mouth. The survey evidence is
interpreted as supporting
such models.

1. Introduction

How do investors develop interest in and receive important information,
leading to decisions about investments. 7 Does a chain of communication,
from one investor to another, plan an important role? That is, is contagion
of interest important in financial markets? Or does their interest and
information tend to come directly from stockbrokers or from publications?
Are conversations among investors related strongly to news breaks, as is the
interest evinced by the news media? Does initial interest that most investors
show in individual stocks tend to be systematic or capricious? Most of us
have casual impressions as to the answers to these questions, but apparently
no thorough study has been undertaken before.
*The institutional
surveys reported here were carried out by Donald
R. DeLuca, Director,
Ofiice for Teaching and Research, the Roper Center, Yale University. This research is part of the
Investor Behavior
Project at the School of Management,
Yale University.
The authors
are
indebted to Robert Alder, Peter L. Bernstein, Jonathan
E. Ingersoll, Jr., Thomas
F. Juster,
Robert Lovell, Burton G. Malkiel, Joel R. Mogy, Jeremy J. Siegel, Martin D. Sass, and John R.
Tilton for helpful suggestions,
and to anonymous
respondents
for filling out questionnaires.
Louis Thomas
provided
research
assistance.
This research
was supported
by the National
Science Foundation.
Ol67-2681/89/53.50

0

1989, Elsevier Science

Publishers

B.V. (North-Holland)

48

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Survey evidence on diffusion of interest

We have undertaken investor surveys whose purpose is to learn something
about this ‘information technology’ and ‘social psychology’ in financial
markets. In all surveys, investors were questioned about specific stocks that
they had purchased. Both institutional and individual investors, and investors in both random samples of stocks and rapid price increase (RPI) stocks
were surveyed.
The surveys of investors were motivated by ‘epidemic models’ of the
transmission of interest and information. One simple epidemic model is
discussed in section 2 below and will be used in section 4 to scale infection
and removal quantities for the time interval over which they were observed.
The survey methods are described in section 3. Some general results are
described in section 4. In section 5 we conclude.
2. An epidemic model
Contagion or epidemic models, like those used by epidemiologists to study
the transmission of disease [e.g., Bailey (1975)] or social psychologists to
study rumors or fads [e.g., Bartholomew (1982)] would seem to be naturally
of relevance to understanding the spread of investor interest in specific
financial assets, and hence to understanding the predictability of returns,
volatility of prices or volume of trade in financial markets. Psychologists
have shown that direct interpersonal communication
among peers is of
singular importance in the transmission of attitudes [see for example
McGuire (1985)]. Interpersonal
communication
among peers seems to
produce the kind of attention and reassurance that leads to changes in
behavior. This fact is well recognized today in marketing: advertisements
often try to create the impression of such communication.
The relevance of such contagion models in finance remains today one of
conjecture; there is little concrete evidence concerning them.1 Researchers
perhaps despair of studying them, since they feel that they do not know how
to disentangle such behavior from behavior that is purposeful and intelligent.
It should be noted, though, that the psychological literature does not
hypothesize that the above models apply only to the less intelligent
individuals. Still, we would expect that the effect of investor epidemics would
be attenuated by some ‘smart money’ that is more systematic in approach to
investing, though such smart money need not eliminate an effect on price
and certainly would not eliminate an effect on transactions volume. The
epidemic model below is meant to apply to ordinary investors. Our survey
results will give some indication what fraction of investors might be
described in those terms.
The classic general epidemic model of Kermack and McKendrick (1927)
‘See, however,

Alder and Alder (1984).

R.J.

Shiller

and J. Pound,

Surcey

ecidence

on diffusion

qjinteresr

49

used to represent the spread of contagious diseases has also been used to
represent the time pattern of rumors, attitudes or fads. Their model in its
simplest form hypothesizes that the number I, of infectives (or, in our
application, information carriers or interested people) is increased by an
amount per unit of time equal to an infection rate b, times the number of
infectives, while b, is itself proportional to the number S, of susceptibles. At
the same time, infectives cease to carry the disease (in our application, forget
or lose interest) and become immune to the disease at a rate per unit of time
equal to a constant removal rate g times the number of infectives. The time
path of I, can show a hump shaped pattern through time, rising at first and
then declining, or a decaying form in which the epidemic only declines from
its initial intensity.
A special case of the general epidemic model that would appear especially
relevant for markets for individual stocks occurs when the number of
infectives remains a very small proportion of the total population, so that the
number of susceptibles is close to the entire population. Then we can regard
the infection rate b, as a constant b. The differential equation for the total
amount of interest for a particular stock among all people I, is then just
dl,ldt = (b -g)l,

+ u,,

(1)

where the error term u, is due either to the ‘source’ of the epidemic or to
variations in the process of contagion. z We shall adopt eq. (1) as our
epidemic model for use in section 4 below.
Supposing that b<g and that the source u, of the epidemic has an
influence only for an instant (as would be the case if, for example, the source
was the sales efforts of stockbrokers in an initial public offering or a single
widely publicized news story at time 0) then the total interest in the stock
would follow an exponential decay pattern. However, hump shaped patterns
for total demand for the stock could still be produced by assuming that total
demand for the stock is a distributed lag on I, (if investors take time to
invest after their initial interest) or if the ‘source’ continues to attract interest
for a while, as for example if it too had an exponential decay pattern. Again,
of course we would not expect to see such a hump pattern conveyed without
alteration into price, although such behavior on the part of ordinary
investors might be manifested in the ‘mean-reverting’ phenomenon for price
movements observed by Campbell and Shiller (1988a, b), Fama and French
(1988), and Poterba and Summers (1987).
Other plausible assumptions will produce I, that closely resembles a
random walk. Suppose that g is only a little smaller than b and that the
*In the study of the diffusion of news, rumors or ideas the ‘source’ may be well defined: e.g., a
particular advertisement.
See Bartholomew
(1982).

50

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Surcey evidence on diffusion of interest

error term is serially uncorrelated noise (formally we may replace u,dt with
the stochastic differential of a Wiener process). Here, the uncorrelated shocks
to demand are cumulated by an (ever changing) pool of interested investors,
to produce a level of interest whose change is nearly unforecastable. Such an
outcome could be part of the reason for the approximate ‘random walk’
behavior of stock prices.
Such serially uncorrelated u, might come about as attention is drawn to
the stock by random associations with other events. News stories or
commonly noted events may remind people of the stock in capricious ways.
Publicity given to success or failure of other stocks that superficially resemble
the stock may cause conversations about the stock. Conversely, important
news about other stocks may divert attention from the stock. Opportunities
to spread interest in a given stock may be influenced by patterns of social
interaction that may vary irregularly over time; conversations about the
stock may be concentrated in certain subgroups of the population that share
irregularly varying activities and diversions. Investment advisory publications
whose policy is to single out a few stocks for special consideration may
capriciously focus attention on the stock at irregular intervals.
Such a theory of random walk behavior for prices is inherently a rather
weak one, in that it relies on serial uncorrelation of shocks that need not be
so, and the theory can be only part of the random walk story. ‘Smart money’
must certainly also play a role in causing prices to behave like a random
walk. Evidence from the market for single family homes, where there are
barriers to exploitation of profit opportunities by ‘smart money’, shows that
prices are not well approximated by a random walk [Case and Shiller
(1989)]. Smart money may be responsible for the low serial correlation of
price changes and yet price movements may still be driven primarily by
irrational fashions and fads [Shiller (1984)].
3. Survey description’
Four samples of investors were collected: 1. a random sample of institutional investors (INST-RAND) 2. a random sample of individual investors
(INDIV-RAND), 3. a rapid price increase sample of institutional investors
(INST-RPI) and 4. a rapid price increase sample of individual investors
(INDIV-RPI).
For our samples of institutional investors, we first sampled stocks and then
sought out investors in these stocks. For INST-RAND a sample of 10 stocks
was selected at random from the Standard and Poor’s Daily Stock Price
Records for the New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange and
Over the Counter Stocks. For INST-RPI a sample of 10 stocks was selected
3See appendix

for further

details of survey

methodology.

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Surce?: ecidence on diffusion of interest
Table
Comparison

A. Institutional
investors (INST)
Price increase
End of June 1984 to end of June
Earnings price ratio
June 1985

51

1

of the four samples.’
Random
samples
(RAND)

Rapid price increase
samples
(RPI)

9.00,

184.5%

1985
5.6”<

2.5%

B. Individual investors (INDIV)
Price increaseb
Earnings-price
ratiod
‘Figures shown are averages (weighted by number of completed questionnaires).
E/P ratios and price increase figures exclude Continental
Illinois Holding Company. The data on earnings forecast changes exclude Continental
Illinois Holding
Company
(two respondents)
in the INST-RAND
group of institutional
investors
and exclude Barris Industries, Chilton Corporation
and Safeguard Services (these
accounting
for a total of three respondents).
Data for individual
investors in the
INST-RAND
group are based on only the firms for which the respondent
indicated a legible firm for which price and earnings were quoted in Standard and
Poor’s Daily Stock Price Records.
bPrice increase for random
sample of individual
investors
is average
price
increase over the year preceding the date respondents
indicated that their holdings
of the COMPANY
(that they identified) reached maximum.
Price increase for the
RPI sample of individual
investors
is price increase for the company
in two
months following the effective date of the IPO.
‘Statistics
for the single firm used to construct
the RPI individual
investor
sample are rounded to discourage identification
of the company.
dEarnings-price
ratio for INDIV-RAND
is the average for the date respondents
indicated
shares in the COMPANY
(that they identified)
reached
maximum.
Earnings are for the preceding 12 months. Earnings-price
ratio for INDIV-RPI
is
for the initial public offering, June, 1985.
the list of 25 stocks experiencing highest price increases in the preceding
year, as reported on the first page of Trendline’s Current Market Perspectives, of June, 1985 and the OTC Chart Manual, of May-June 1985. The
stocks in the RPI group were further selected to have high price-earnings
ratio and other characteristics (see appendix). For each of these samples of
stocks, institutional stockholders were then selected from those firms who
had reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission that they held one
of the stocks on either March 31 or June 30, 1985.
For institutional investors, our questionnaires were sent to senior officers
of the institutions asking that the questionnaire be forwarded to the ‘decision
makers’ who were responsible for the institution’s holding of the stock in
question. We emphasized that only actual decision makers should till out the
questionnaire. Respondents were urged to call us collect if they had any
questions (we received about 20 phone calls). We thus compiled a sample for
from

52

R.J.

Shiller

and J. Pound,

Surrey

ecldence

on dljiision

of inreresr

INST-RAND (30 usable completed questionnaires) and a sample for INSTRPI (41 usable completed questionnaires).
For our random sample of individual investors INDIV-RAND, we took a
list that was a random high-income sample of 500 individuals from the
continental United States, provided for us by Survey Sampling, Inc. The first
question on the questionnaire inquired whether they had purchased common
stock, and to indicate the name of the stock they purchased most recently.
These respondents were told that the company they indicated would be
referred to as the COMPANY in following questions on the questionnaire.
From these we received 156 usable completed questionnaires from stockholders. Our rapid price increase sample INDIV-RPI of individual investors
was produced from a random sample of stockholders in a single company,
which had an initial public offering (IPO) a year earlier, followed by a
dramatic price increase despite negligible earnings. (The price had declined
back to the neighborhood of the offering price by the survey date.) The
company agreed to allow us to use a random sample of 204 of their
stockholders on the condition that we not disclose the name of the company.
We received 134 usable completed questionnaires
for our INDIV-RPI
sample.
We believe that our random samples of both individual and institutional
investors are genuinely random samplings from the entire U.S. population
and thus indicative of general investor traits. Of course, since not all
members of the sample responded to our questionnaires, there is a possibility
of selection bias in those answering questions. However, we took great pains
to maintain a high response rate (see appendix for details), and achieved a
59% response rate from institutional investors, a 59% response rate from our
INDIV-RAND group of individual investors and a 66% response rate from
our INDIV-RPI group of individual investors. These high response rates are
our best protection against selection bias.d
The composition of our RPI samples could be described in various ways.
We emphasize the fact that, since the price increased a lot in these stocks,
important information about the stock became public in the recent past. We
included the rapid price increase samples in our study because we wanted to
study stocks for which interpersonal communications might be intense. The
behavior of investors in these stocks are of particular interest, for example, in
understanding the alleged phenomena of ‘hot markets’. The samples might
also be described as samples of successful investors, but this latter interpre4High response rates are in
overlooked
by many surveyors.
magnitude
given by computed
not known. The response rates
not all responses yielded usable
of frame).

a sense more important
than large sample size, a fact that is
The uncertainty
related to simple sampling error has a known
standard
errors while the magnitude
of sample selection bias is
in the text are based on counts of cooperative
responses, while
questionnaires
(for example, some indicated that they were out

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Surcey ecidence on diffusion of interest

53

tation is of limited use. since most investors did not buy and sell over the
interval we used to define the price increase. A third interpretation of the
RPI samples, and the most tenuous of the three suggested here, is that the
RPI sample, with high price increases to high price-earnings ratios, might be
interpreted as samples of stocks that were overpriced by overly enthusiastic
investors. Indeed, the single firm in our RPI individual investor sample had
been identified in a prominent article in Barrens a few months before the
survey as an example of a fad like the computer stock fad a few years
earlier.5 The stock had a good ‘story’ to go with it, i.e., the company was
pursuing a simple new idea in marketing that most investors could
appreciate.
In considering the third of the above interpretations, note that DeBondt
and Thaler (1985) found that stocks whose price had risen very dramatically
tended to have negative abnormal returns in subsequent years. A number of
other studies have shown that stocks whose price is high relative to earnings
tend to have negative abnormal returns .6 These studies thus suggest that
high price increase and high P/E stocks may be overpriced (perhaps because
of a fashion or fad) and thus tend to do poorly subsequently. However, the
extent to which these stocks actually tend to do poorly subsequently is not
enough to allow us to say that we can identify overpriced stocks with any
reliability.

4. Survey results
4.1 Source and nature of initial interest
We asked a series of questions aimed at discovering how investors became
interested in and decided to buy stock in a particular company. The results
are reported in table 2, parts a and b.’
From these results, it would appear that initial interest in individual stocks
is usually motivated at least in part by interpersonal communications.
Among institutional investors, most in both the INST-RAND and the INSTRPI groups said initial interest was stimulated by another investment
5The Barron’s article pointed out that the firm had never made a profit and was selling at a
very high multiple over projected earnings in a business where many active competitors
were in
the held.
6Reinganum
(1981) claimed that the effect of the price relative to earnings
was really
subsumed
by a ‘size effect’, however Reinganum’s
finding was disputed
by Basu (1983) and
Peavey and Goodwin (1983).
‘These questions ask subjects to report on the sources of their own behavior, and thus is of
the kind that is widely criticized.
However,
even critics of such questions
will admit that
‘Accurate reports will occur when influential stimuli are salient and are plausible causes of the
responses
they produce’.
[Nisbett
and Wilson (1977).] We think that careful wording
of
questions can in the case of investments
in particular
firms often isolate the initial source of
interest. See Katz and Lazarsfeld, ‘The Art of Asking Why. (1955).

R.J. Shiller

and J. Pound,

Surt.ey evidence on diffusion

Table
Ouestions

to institutional

Did any of the following
COMPANY
stock?

motivate

your

2a

investors
initial

on sources

interest

of interest.’

in a way that led to your

[CIRCLE
Yes
a. An investment

of interest

ONE

NUMBER
No

who is not an investment

magazine,

television

or radio

show.
1
15%]
6%)
n:30, 40

If YES, name
d. An investment

EACH1

of periodical
advisory

;47:/., 25O,l
(9%. 7O,)

professional.
;IOP;. 30”;]
(5%. 73,)
n:30, 40

c. A newspaper,

FOR

of

professional.
75”;]
7%)
x30, 40

b. A person

purchase

2
W%. 7Wol
(5%. 79,)

2
[ lOO%, 8j0,]
(-9
6”,)

or show:
newsletter

or brokerage

house

recommendation.
;703
48” ]
(8:;:
8”:)
x30,

If YES, name

of newsletter

or brokerage

40

house:

e. My initial interest was the result of my, or someone else’s, systematic
search over a large
number of stocks (using a computerized
or other similar search procedure)
for a stock with
certain characteristics.
2
1
[67%, 25%]
[33%. 75%1
(9%. 7%)
(9%. 7%)
x30, 40
“In the square brackets
beneath
each answer are the percent of the random
sample of
institutional
investors (INST-RAND)
followed by the percent of rapid price increase sample of
institutional
investors (INST-RPI)
who chose that answer. Beneath (in parentheses)
are the
standard
errors for the percents, and the number n who chose to answer that question.

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound. Surrey ecidrnce on diffusion of interest

Table
Questions

to individual

a. What first drew your attention
(open ended question, our coding
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

b. Was a stockbroker

influential

2b

investors

on sources

to the COMPANY?
of their answers:)
~131,

Friend or relative
Worked for company
Someone involved with co.
Broker
Spinoff of successful co.
IPO - publicity
Periodicals
- newspapers
Customer
of co.
Inherited or gift
Performance
of similar co.

of interest.’

124

[13%, 31%]
CZl~,, O%l
C3,b. 7Pil
[33?;, 240,/,]
[20/. O%l
6%
[ii;:
7”,;]
;;;j;

(3%. 4%)
g:

;h,

g.

‘y’

&
2%)
(2%. 2%)
(1%. 2%)
(I%, 2%
(1%. 4%)

;$;

co%, 27721
in getting

55

you to buy stock in the COMPANY?
Yes
[37% 33%]
;y
67’)]
(42:
40,:)
(4%. 4%)
n:153, 122

c. Was another person you spoke to, besides a stockbroker
(for example, a friend or business
associate), influential in getting you to buy stock in the COMPANY?
Yes
k%,
SOO,‘]
E33%, SO”/,1
(4%. 40%)
(4%. 4%)
n:lSZ, 122
d. Was the fact that someone (whom you know
influential in getting you to buy the stock?

or know of) bought
Yes
C28%, 44%]
(4Oi. 4%)
n:153,

stock

in the COMPANY

No
[72%, 56”,,J
(4%, 4%)
121

e. Was your decision to invest in the COMPANY
the result of your, or someone
systematic search over a large number of stocks for a stock with certain characteristics?
Yes
;y
-1
c38%. -1
(4%, -)
(42: -)
n: 145, 0

else’s,

f. When you made the decision to purchase the COMPANY
stock, had you recently conducted
your own analysis of the company and its likely stock performance?
This might involve using
Value Line, other reports, computerized
databases,
etc.
No
Yes
C77%, 84%]
(4%, 4%)
‘In the square brackets by each answer are the percent of the random sample of individual
investors (INDIV-RAND)
followed by the percent of rapid price increase sample of individual
investors (INDIV-RPI)
who gave that answer. In parentheses
are the standard
errors for the
percents. Also given are the number n who chose to answer that question, first for the INDIVRAND group and second for the INDIV-RPI
group.

56

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Surcey evidence on diffitsion of inrerest

professional, and some percent were also motivated by a person who was not
an investment professional. Among individual investors. about a third in
both groups were motivated by stockbrokers and another third in the
INDIV-RAND group (and half in the INDIV-RPI group) were motivated by
another person, not a stockbroker.*
It is a very strong result here that both individual and institutional
investors generally do not get interested in individual stocks by reading
about them alone. There is a strong interpersonal component to investing, as
hypothesized in epidemic models. This confirms for investors the ‘two step
flow of communication’ from media to influentials to others shown first by
Lazarsfeld and Katz (1955) in other contexts.
Among individual investors, a substantial part of this interpersonal
communication takes the form of communications with stockbrokers. However, since only about a third of individual investors say their initial interest
came from stockbrokers, stockbrokers themselves are apparently not the
direct cause of most investor interest. Moreover, there is other information in
the results that suggest the importance of a chain of infection among
investors themselves. Note that 28% in the INDIV-RAND group and 44% in
the INDIV-RPI group said that they were inlhtenced by the fact that
someone they knew or knew of bought stock in the company. We shall see in
the section below on infection rates that, even though many people claim not
to have become interested via interpersonal communications, a substantial
number of investors claim to have interested many others.
The most striking bit of evidence that some sort of diffusion of information
model has some truth to it is in answers to the questions e in the two parts
of table 2. Most individual investors and most of the institutional investors
in the RPI group denied that they were systematic in their decision to buy
the stock, that is, they answered no to part e. Most of the INST-RAND
investors answered yes to part e, claiming that they were systematic, yet even
in the INST-RAND a third said that they were not systematic.
For individual investors, it is also the case that most do no analysis of the
company themselves. The results to question f in table 2b show that less than
a quarter of individual investors do any analysis.
The differences between the random samples and the rapid price increase
samples are important. Institutional investors in the rapid price increase
group are less systematic and more influenced by interpersonal communications than are random institutional investors. Individual investors in rapid
price increase stocks are also more likely to be influenced by interpersonal
communications
than are random investors. This might mean that it is
sLease,
advice. In
from 14%
investment

Lewellen and Schlarbaum
(1976) found that older investors relied less on stockbroker
their five ‘clusters’ of investors, the percent reporting relying on brokers’ advice ranged
to 34%. They also found (1974) that only 7% of investors ‘rely primarily
on paid
newsletters or investment counsellors
advice’.

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Surcey evidence on diffusion of inrerest

57

difficult to be systematic about stocks undergoing rapid information flow,
and an epidemic flow of information might therefore come about. Or, it
might mean that the price increase itself is the result of a social movement
among a class of investors who are vulnerable to fads or fashions in markets.
We asked respondents to try to recall their expectations, on the date when
their shares held reached their maximum, for the percentage increase in price
per share in the succeeding year. We found remarkably high expected
increases: an average increase expected of 33% for the INST-RAND group,
54% for the INST-RPI group, 38% for the INDIV-RAND group, and 30”/,
for the INDIV-RPI group.
We also asked institutional investors whether the respondent was ‘sufIiciently enthused about your purchase of COMPANY that you thought
about it during your leisure hours’. Of the INST-RAND group, 37% said yes,
of the INST-RPI group, 63% said yes.9 We asked of individual investors
‘Were you enthusiastic and excited about the company before your recent
purchase? Among INDIV-RAND, 60% said yes, among INDIV-RPI, 63%
said yes.
With such unsystematic and interpersonal behavior, such high expectations
for profit and enthusiasm, contagion of interest seems plausible.
4.2 Timing of discussions
All respondents were asked the date when they first became interested in
the stock and when their holdings of the stock reached maximum. We will
refer to the time between the two dates as t2 and the time between the latter
date and the questionnaire date as t, (both measured in years). Their sum,
the total time since the individual became interested in the stock, will be
denoted as T= t, + t,.
An important question for our purposes is whether communications with
others proceeds smoothly from person to person, as in epidemic models, or
whether they tend to bunch around dates of news events. We asked the
institutional investors: ‘When were you most active in discussing COMPANY stock with others?‘*0 Spaces were provided to enter the month and
year. There was little apparent bunching of dates. For each of two tirmsii
there was one date given twice. For one firm, one date was given by three
respondents. But there was no other such coincidence of dates.12 For the
random sample of institutional investors, active discussion came on average
9We did not ask institutional
respondents
to recall their level of enthusiasm
before they
purchased,
so the difference between groups on this question may be due only to the success of
the RPI group.
toThe actual questionnaire
had in place of the word COMPANY
the name of the company
for the institutional
samples and the RPI individual samples.
“Zenith
Labs and Stocker and Yale.
t2 Limited, Inc.

J.E.B.O.-

E

58

R.J. Shillrr md J. Pound, Surwy rcidence on diffusion of~inreresr

3.2 months (s. e. 1.7) before the date t2 when holdings reached maximum, for
the RPI institutional group, 1.6 months (s. e. 1.4). Note that for institutional
investors purchases are rarely on a one-shot basis. We found in an earlier
paper (1987) that for most institutional investors, if quarterly holdings are
plotted against time, a ‘hump-shaped’ or other smooth pattern tends to
emerge. Thus, the time of maximum conversations for institutional investors
tends to come after some purchases are made but while they are still
purchasing. We also asked of our two individual investor samples: ‘Did the
most important discussions you had with others about the COMPANY tend
to come right after and in response to some important news break that was
related to the COMPANY?’ With INDIV-RAND 637; said no, while with
INDIV-RPI 76”/, said no.
We interpret these results as favorable to the notion that the timing of
information spread is determined to a substantial extent by patterns of
interpersonal communications.
4.3 Self-reported

removal and infection

rates

Table 3 reports questions asking respondents to report, in effect, their own
removal rates and infection rates, as described in the epidemic model above.
Such self-reporting is likely to be unreliable, but may give some rough
indication.
We see from the answers to table 3, questions a and b, that, as one might
expect, attention to the company declines with time after the stock is
purchased. Since the time interval since the purchase varies across respondents, it is important to standardize this decline in terms of the time since
purchase. This can be done by, in effect, estimating the removal rate g in the
model, eq. (1) above. Let us call the answers to table 3 question a as yl (the
percentage of time they spent thinking about, analyzing and discussing the
company around the date of their purchase of the company) and the answer
to table 3 question b as y2 (the percentage of time they now spend thinking
about, analyzing and discussing the company) respectively. For each respondent we took an estimate of g as g=ln(yl/y2)/t,,
and the ‘half life’
corresponding to this g, ln2/g, was also computed. The median g for INSTRAND was 1.84 (n=37, half life 0.38 years), for INST-RPI, it was 1.39
(n= 25, half life 0.50 years). The median g for INDIV-RAND
was 3.72
(n = 78, half life 0.19 years) and for INDIV-RPI, 1.73 (n = 62, half life =0.40
years).” One survey [McGuire (1985)] on estimates in the psychology
literature of removal rates from memory after persuasive communications
*)The distribution
of g across respondents
showed a severe outiier problem,
since some
individuals
claimed that they spent no time currently
thinking
about the company,
yielding
intinity for their 6, and some report essentially no time. Se we report the sample median instead
of the sample mean.

R.J. Shiller

and J. Pound, Surrey

evidence on diffusion

Table
Questions

to institutional

01.inrerest

59

3a

investors

on removal

and infection.’

a. Approximately
what percent of your total time did you spend thinking about, analyzing, and
discussing the COMPANY
in a typical
week near the dare when shares held reached maximum
.
(question- I. above)?
[4.5?,. 9.0”,]
(0.89. 1.7)
~28. 39
b. In a typical
thinking about.

week, approximately
what percent of your
analyzing. and discussing the COMPANY?

total

time do you currcntlg

spend

[ 1.5”,, ‘.3”,]
(0.27, 0.40)
~28, 39
c. Roughly

how many people have you personally

talked

to explicitly

about

COMPANY

stock?

[7.2. 21.01
( 1.4, 6.5)
~28. 41
d. How many of these people would you guess might
COMPANY
as a result of your discussion
with them?

have

become

seriously

interested

in

firm, if you

are

[4.2. IO.01
(1.2. 4.1)
n:27, 37
e. How many institutional
investors in the CO!vfPANY
(outside your own
afliliated with an institution)
have you spoken to about the COMPANY?b
[O.S, 2.91
(0.32, 0.58)
~29. 39
“In the square brackets
beneath
each answer are the percent of the random
sample of
institutional
investors (INST-RAND)
followed by the percent of rapid price increase sample of
institutional
investors (INST-RPI)
who chose that answer. Beneath (in parentheses)
are the
standard
errors for the percents, and the number n who chose to answer that question.
bT~o extreme outlier answers were dropped from the sample. We thought that the question
must have been misinterpreted.

concluded that the ‘decay parameters
differ wildly: some studies report most
of the initially induced attitude
change persisting
for months . . . others
report intermediate
decay rates suggesting
a half-life of about a week’.14
There is also a literature in marketing
which produces estimates of half lives
for memory that show a range that includes estimates here, see Bagozzi and
Silk (1983). Thus, our estimates of g are consistent with the notion that the
decline of interest is due to the same process of forgetting
that has been
studied by psychologists.
Questions
c and d of table 3 suggest an extremely
high infection rate:
people claim to have spoken to large numbers of people and to have gotten
them interested in the stock. The answers to the third question suggest, given
the relatively small number of institutional
investors in the individual
stocks,
I4McGuire,

‘Attitudes

and Attitude

Change’,

p. 290.

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound. Surcr.~ evidence on diffusion of interest

60

Table
Questions

to individual

investors

3b
on removal

and infection.’

a. Approximately
what percent of your total time did you spend thinking about, analyzing, and
discussing
the COMPANY
in the few weeks before you made your most recent purchase
(question 3 above)?
Percent

[3.03”,. 4.070,]
(0.60”,. 0.80“,)
n:120. 95

b. In a typical
thinking about,

week, approximately
what percent of your
analyzing, and discussing
the CO>IPANY?b

total

time do you

current/y

spend

Percent
[ 1.98”,. Z.OS”,]
(0.74”,. 0.46)
n:1’5, 100
c. How many friends, business associates,
and other potential
investors would you guess you
have talked to about the COMPANY
since the time you first became interested in the stock?
Number

C19.69. 5.101
(7.34, 0.70)
n:145, 118

of people

d. How many of these people would you guess
COMPANY
as a result of your conversations’?
Number

of people

became

very likely

to purchase

stock

in the

very likely to purchase
C3.28. 1.611
(0.84. 0.24)
X133. 103

“In the square brackets
beneath
each ans-er
are the percent
of the random
sample of
individual
investors (INDIV-RAND)
followed by the percent of rapid price increase sample of
individual
investors (INDIV-RPI)
who chose that answer. Beneath (in parentheses)
are the
standard
errors for the percents, and the number n who chose to answer that question.
Three extreme outlier observations
were dropped from the sample for question c. We thought
the question
must have been misinterpreted.
Dropping
these has no effect on estimate of
removal rates as these respondents
did not answer question a.

that the set of institutional investors in a particular stock in the RPI group is
so interconnected that it might even be regarded as a ‘small group’ as defined
by social psychologists. However, 44% of the respondents in the INST-RPI
group answered zero to the third question.
As with the removal rate, we can standardize the self-reported infection
rate in terms of the time elapsed since the person first became interested in
(and presumably transmitting interest in) the stock.
The total interest engendered by the individual is, by the model,
bjI(s)ds=(bl,/g)(l-e-g’).

(2)

0

To convert the total interest engendered to the total number x of people who
became interested, we may divide the above expression by lo. Taking the

R.J.

Shiller

and

J. Pound,

Surcey

evidence on diffusion

of interest

61

removal rates g etimated above, we compute for each individual an estimate
b=xg/( 1 -em”‘). This estimate of b was computed for each individual and
the sample average taken as an estimate of b. For the INST-RAND the
estimated infection rate was 20.66 (n = 36, s. e. =S.Ol), for INST-RPI it wa:
7.35 (n=25, s. e. =2.1 l), for INDIV-RAND it was 12.74 (n =99, s. e. = 3.59:
and for INDIV-RPI it was 3.71 (n=80, s. e. =0.59). In each sample the
distribution of infection rates across individuals is highly skewed to the right
with a bunching of zeros at the left. Thus the median infection rates are
always substantially less than the mean infection rates : (for INST-RAND
9.29, for INST-RPI 2.02, for INDIV-RAND 0.00, for INDIV-RPI 2.22)
Many investors get no one else interested in the stocks; at the other extreme
some claim to get dozens interested.15
The estimated infection rates are greater than our estimated removal rates
this would imply a rapidly exploding interest for both random and rapid
price increase groups. We believe that answers to the second question above
on which the estimate of the infection rate is based cannot be taken at face
value. It will; probably be very difficult to pin down the value of the infection
‘- rate with any accuracy; suffice it to say only that our results are consistent
with the notion that it may be significantly greater than zero.
5. Discussion
We have seen a number of indications that contagion of interest, along
lines described in the simple epidemic model presented above, may be
important in describing the behavior of investors.
The most direct evidence comes from questions asking investors to assess
the importance of contagion. Unfortunately, there is a wide disparity between
the reports as to how many others the investor infected from the reports as
to how many of the investors were infected by other individuals. The
respondents claimed to have gotten a very large number of other people
seriously interested in their stock, so that estimated infection rates are
enormous, so much greater than removal rates that our simple model would
imply rapidly exploding interest in all stocks. But only a third of our
individual investors say their initial interest was prompted by persons other
than a stockbroker. Because of this disparity, we were not able to use the
results to evaluate our model of the random walk behavior of stock prices,
which required that infection rates be close to removal rates.
t5Of course, in a random
sample of individual
stockholders,
we are likely to find some
investment
professionals,
even stockbrokers,
who are more likely to infect others with interest,
However, this does not account for the high infection rate in our random sample of individual
investors.
In INDIV-RAND
only 8 respondents
answered
yes to ‘Are you currently
an
investment
professional?
(for example, stockbroker,
investment
advisor or investment
banker)‘.
When these were deleted from the sample, the average answer to question d, Table 3b (the
average number interested) fell from 3.28 to 3.08.

62

R.J. Shiller

and J. Pound,

Survey evidence on diffusion

of interest

There is, however, other confirming evidence that contagion of interest is
important. A third of our random sample of institutional investors and over
60”/, of our random sample of individual investors described themselves as
unsystematic in their choice of stock. The great majority of the individual
investors said they had done no analysis of their own of the stock. Among
individual investors, 28% in the random sample and 45’; in the rapid price
increase sample said that they not only knew of someone else who had
bought the stock but were influenced by this fact in their decision to
purchase the stock.
As noted before, it is likely that contagion of interest does not proceed
evenly for all stocks at all times: only certain stocks are ‘interesting’. With
rapid price increase stocks such contagion is likely to be important, and we
might possibly find aspects of a ‘fad’ or ‘rumor mill’ in operation. Among
institutional investors, the rapid price increase investors (when compared to
the random sample of institutional investors) were much less likely to say
that their interest in the stock was due to a systematic search, and more
likely to be influenced by other individuals or publications. Among individual investors the rapid price increase investors (when compared to the
random sample of individual investors) were more influenced by friends and
relatives and less by stockbrokers.
None of the results here constitute strong evidence that markets are not
efficient; indeed we did not expect to find such strong evidence from a
survey. Even granting our results, it is still possible that some smart money,
perhaps missed in or not responding to our survey, offset the behavior of
other investors. We think, however, that our results are of relevance in
evaluating the efficient markets hypothesis. We have documented that the
sort of behavior that underlies contagion models is of substantial importance
among investors, even among the professional institutional investors that we
might normally call ‘smart money’.
Appendix: Survey description

Each of our four samples of investors consists of investors in specific
individual stocks.
For institutional investors, it was feasible to select stocks first and then
randomly select investors in these stocks. All institutional
investment
managers exercising discretion over accounts with combined equity assets
exceeding $100 million must report their holdings to the S.E.C. on Form 13f.
Equity holdings below 10,000 and also below $200,000 in market value need
not be reported. We accessed this information using Computer Directions
Advisors, Inc., SPECTRUM III: 13f Institutional Stockholders Survey. It was
found that a number of institutions were selected twice, as holding more than
one of the stocks in our sample. It was considered infeasible to ask

R.J. Shiller and 1. Pound. Survq

rridence on diffusion of interest

63

participation regarding more than one stock by a single institution. Thus
institutions were dropped from the lists of stocks until each institution
appeared only once.
For the random sample of institutional investors (INS-f-RAND), stocks
were first selected at random and institutional investors selected from them,
as described in the text. The INST-RAND group stocks for which we have
completed questionnaires (number received in parentheses) were Continental
Illinois Holding Company (2), NCR Corporation (12), Pittston (5), Service
Fracturing (l), Stocker and Yale (2), and Unitrode (8).
For the sample of rapid price increase institutional investors (INST-RPI)
we first compiled a list of the top 25 performing stocks as described in the
text. Each stock in the list of 2.5 was given a score equal to the average of
the standardized values of the stock’s price increase over the preceding year,
and price/earnings ratio. A news search was done for the stocks, to exclude
special events; these were merger and acquisition announcements in which
the company was the target. Also excluded were stocks that had higher splitadjusted price in an earlier year than the maximum achieved in the sample
year. From the remaining, the stocks with the top 10 scores were selected.
The RPI group stocks for which we have completed questionnaires (number
in parentheses) were: Barris Industries (l), Chilton Corp (l), Limited, Inc.
(ll), Marion Labs (3), Mylan Labs (4), Rollins Environmental Services (5),
Safecard Services (l), U.S. Health Care Systems (12), and Zenith Labs (3).
Our INST-RPI sample chanced upon a boom in companies related to the
movement toward cutting health care costs: there were three generic or
consumer drug companies in our RPI group and a manager of health
maintenance organizations Labs. Others in the RPI group were diverse: there
were a producer of young women’s apparel, and a disposer of concentrated
industrial waste. Five of the nine firms on which we have responses had
doubled their earnings between 1982 and 1984. Four paid no dividends in
1984.
For the random sample of individual investors (INDIV-RAND), we began
with a random sample of high income investors in the United States,
provided for us by Survey Sampling, Inc. That firm uses census tract data,
data on vehicle registrations, and other public data as inputs to a multiple
regression that predicts income as reported on a subsample. They provided
us with a random sample of individuals in the continental United States
whose income predicted by this regression was $70,000 per year or greater.
The average income respondents reported to us on our questionnaire was
$108,000. These respondents were asked to till out the questionnaire if they
ever bought common stock shares.
For our rapid price increase sample of individual investors (INDIV-RPI)
we secured the permission of a single firm to use a sample of their
stockholders.

64

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound, Surcey ecidence on diffusion of interest

The survey of the decision makers then followed Dillman’s (1978) ‘total
design method’ fairly closely. The institutional investor survey was implemented by Donald Deluca at the Roper Center at Yale University.
For institutional samples, separate questionnaires were prepared using a
word processor for each of the 20 companies in our sample. The name of the
company appeared throughout
the questionnaire,
to affirm clearly our
interest in investor behavior with regard to that stock only. For the INDIVRPI sample, the name of the company was used throughout the questionnaire, and some questions clearly completely specific to that stock were
asked, so that it would be quite clear that the questionnaire pertained only
to that stock.
Questionnaires were first mailed September, 1985 for INST-RAND and
INST-RPI, in April, 1986 for INDIV-RPI and July, 1986 for INDIV-RAND.
Enclosed with the questionnaire was a letter, self-addressed envelope and
printed brochure describing the Investor Behavior Project at Yale University.
The letter emphasized that the results of the project would serve a useful
social purpose, and that results would be made public. It was promised that
all respondents would remain anonymous and that they would receive a
report giving all of our results. The report to them was offered as an
incentive to participate, as well as some assurance that we were not trying to
secure private advantage from the information gathered. About a week after
the initial mailing a followup letter or postcard was mailed, reminding them
of the questionnaire and reasserting its importance for research on financial
markets. About three weeks later a letter was sent out to those who had not
yet responded, with a duplicate questionnaire (in case the respondent had
lost the first) and another letter (noting the lack of response) and selfaddressed envelope. About 7 weeks after the initial mailing a final letter was
sent to those who still had not responded, certified mail, with another
questionnaire and self-addressed envelope. The timetable and letter format
conformed closely to those that Dillman found yielded high response rates.
For the institutional investors, initially, 216 questionnaires were sent, 89 to
the INST-RAND group and 127 to the INST-RPI group. There were 74
completed questionnaires, although after we classified three questionnaires
(based on margin comments) as out of frame the total was reduced to 71, 30
in the INST-RAND group and 41 in the RPI group. We received 54 letters
or phone calls that indicated that the respondent was out of frame, so that a
total of 57 were out of frame. Of these, 24 said that they never held the
stock, and 24 said that they did not decide to buy the stock (that the stock
was in a custodial account only, or that it was received as a part of a
distribution). We believe that some who said they never held the stock
actually held it as part of custodial accounts, which they did not check for
us. The remainder of the 57 was accounted for by 6 index funds, 3
institutions that used a rigid formula for their investments, and one options

R.J. Shiller ond J. Pound, Survey evidence on diffiion

of interest

65

manager whose holdings were due solely to rising options premiums. We
received 14 letters declining to fill out the questionnaire, and 1 letter
indicating that the decision maker was deceased. The remaining 73 institutions did not respond in any way to our letters.
We thus received cooperative responses from (71+57)/216=59%
of those
in our institutional samples. We are pleased with this response rate. It is
lower than those attained by Dillman, but our study suffered the handicap
that we had to obtain the cooperation of two persons for each questionnaire,
and that the questionnaire asked questions that respondents may feel are
sensitive.
In INDIV-RAND, we received 156 completed questionnaires, 128 responses indicating that the respondent had never owned stock, 5 letters
indicating that the respondent was deceased, and 17 addressee unknowns.
We thus received cooperative responses from (156 + 128)/(500- 5 - 17) = 59%
of those in our sample.
In INDIV-RPI we received 134 completed questionnaires, one letter
indicating the subject was decreased, 5 refusals to participate and 3 addressee
unknowns from an initial mailing of 204 questionnaires, a response rate of
134/(204 - 1 - 3) = 67%.
References
Adler, Patricia A. and Peter Adler, 1984, The social dynamics of linancial markets (JAI Press,
Greenwich, CT).
Bagozzi, Richard P. and Alvin J. Silk, 1983, Recall, recognition
and the measurement
of memory
for print advertisements,
Marketing Science 2, 95-134.
Bailey, Norman T.J., 1975, The mathematical
theory of infectious diseases (Griffin, London).
Bartholomew,
D.J., 1982, Stochastic
models for social processes, 3rd ed. (John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester).
Basu, Sanjoy, 1983, The relationship
between earnings yield, market value and return: Further
evidence, Journal of Financial Economics
I?, 129-156.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1987, Cointegration
and tests of present value models,
Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062-1088.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, The dividend-price
ratio and expectations
of
future dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b. Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends,
Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.
Case, Karl E. and Robert J. Shiller, 1989, The eficiency of the market for single-family
homes,
American Economic Review 79, 125-137.
Daley, D.J. and D.G. Kendall, 1965, Stochastic rumors, Journal of the Institute of Mathematics
Applications
I, 42-55.
DeBondt, Werner F.M. and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?, Journal of
Finance 40, 793-805.
Dillman, Don A., 1978, Mail and telephone surveys: The total design method (John Wiley &
Sons, New York).
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Permanent
and temporary
components
of stock
prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246273.
Friend, Irwin and Marshall Blume, 1978, The changing role of the institutional
investor (John
Wiley & Sons, New York).
Katq Elihu and Paul F. Lazarsfeld, 1955, Personal influence (The Free Press, Glencoe, IL).

66

R.J. Shiller and J. Pound. Survey evidence on dijiision of inrerest

Kerrtrack,
W.O. and A.G. ‘McKendrick,
1927, Contributions
to the mathematical
theorv of
epidemics, Proceedings
of the Royal Society Al 15, 7CQ-721.
Lease. Ronald C.. Wilbur G. Lewellen and Garv G. Schlarbaum.
1974. The individual investor:
Attributes and attitudes, Journal of Finance 29, 413-433.
Lease, Ronald C., Wilbur G. Lewellen and Gary G. Scharbaum,
1976. Market segmentation:
Evidence on the individual investor, Financial Analysts Journal.
McGuire,
William J., 1985, Attitudes
and attitude
change,
in: Gardner
Linzey and Elliot
Aronson, eds., The handbook
of social psychology,
3rd ed, vol. II (Random
House, New
York).
Nisbett, Robert E. and Timothy DeCamp Wilson, 1977, Telling more than we can know: Verbal
reports on mental processes, Psychological
Review 84, 231-259.
Peavey III, John W. and Dave A. Goodwin,
1983, The significance of P/E’s for portfolio returns,
Journal of Portfolio Management
9, 4347.
Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers,
1987, Mean reversion in stock prices: Evidence
and implications,
Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.
Pound, John and Robert J. Shiller, 1987, Are institutional
investors
speculators?,
Journal
of
Portfolio Management
13, 46-52.
Reinganum,
Marc R., 1981, Misspecilication
of capital asset pricing: Empirical anomalies based
on earnings yields and market values, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 19-46.
Shiller, Robert J., 1984, Stock prices and social dynamics,
Brookings
Papers on Economic
Activity 2, 457-498.

