Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 19, Number 1—Winter 2005—Pages 33–50

The Impact of Social Structure on
Economic Outcomes
Mark Granovetter

S

ocial structure, especially in the form of social networks, affects economic
outcomes for three main reasons. First, social networks affect the flow and
the quality of information. Much information is subtle, nuanced and difficult to verify, so actors do not believe impersonal sources and instead rely on
people they know. Second, social networks are an important source of reward and
punishment, since these are often magnified in their impact when coming from
others personally known. Third, trust, by which I mean the confidence that others
will do the “right” thing despite a clear balance of incentives to the contrary,
emerges, if it does, in the context of a social network.
Economists have recently devoted considerable attention to the impact of
social structure and networks on the economy; for example, see the economists’
chapters in Rauch and Casella (2001) (and the illuminating review essay of this
volume by Zuckerman, 2003), as well as Dutta and Jackson (2003) and CalvóArmengol (2004). However, I focus here on sociologists’ contributions. Sociologists
have developed core principles about the interactions of social structure, information, ability to punish or reward, and trust that frequently recur in their analyses of
political, economic and other institutions. I begin by reviewing some of these
principles. Building on these, I then discuss how social structures and social
networks can affect economic outcomes like hiring, price, productivity and
innovation.

Social Networks and Economic Outcomes: Core Principles
The following four core principles are important, but not meant to be exhaustive or, in any sense, an axiomatic treatment.

y Mark Granovetter is the Joan Butler Ford Professor, Department of Sociology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California. His e-mail address is 具mgranovetter@stanford.edu典.

34

Journal of Economic Perspectives

1) Norms and Network Density. Norms—shared ideas about the proper way to
behave—are clearer, more firmly held and easier to enforce the more dense a social
network. (If a social network consists of n “nodes,” people, firms or other social
units, “density” is the proportion of the possible n(n ⫺ 1)/ 2 connections among
these nodes that are actually present.)1 This argument is one of the oldest in social
psychology; for instance, see the classic account of Festinger, Schachter and Back
(1948). It rests on the fact that the denser a network, the more unique paths along
which information, ideas and influence can travel between any two nodes. Thus,
greater density makes ideas about proper behavior more likely to be encountered
repeatedly, discussed and fixed; it also renders deviance from resulting norms
harder to hide and, thus, more likely to be punished.
One implication of this perspective is that collective action that depends on
overcoming free-rider problems is more likely in groups whose social network is
dense and cohesive, since actors in such networks typically internalize norms that
discourage free riding and emphasize trust. Note that all else equal, larger groups
will have lower network density because people have cognitive, emotional, spatial
and temporal limits on how many social ties they can sustain. Thus, the larger the
group, the lower its ability to crystallize and enforce norms, including those against
free riding. The insight that free-rider behavior is especially unlikely within immediate families is a special case of this argument.
2) The Strength of Weak Ties. More novel information flows to individuals
through weak than through strong ties. Because our close friends tend to move in
the same circles that we do, the information they receive overlaps considerably with
what we already know. Acquaintances, by contrast, know people that we do not and,
thus, receive more novel information. This outcome arises in part because our
acquaintances are typically less similar to us than close friends, and in part because
they spend less time with us. Moving in different circles from ours, they connect us
to a wider world. They may therefore be better sources when we need to go beyond
what our own group knows, as in finding a new job or obtaining a scarce service.
This is so even though close friends may be more interested than acquaintances in
helping us; social structure can dominate motivation. This is one aspect of what I
have called “the strength of weak ties” (Granovetter, 1973, 1983).
This argument has macro level implications. If each person’s close friends
know one another, they form a closely knit clique. Individuals are then connected
to other cliques through their weak rather than their strong ties. Thus, from an
“aerial” view of social networks, if cliques are connected to one another, it is mainly
by weak ties. This implies that such ties determine the extent of information
diffusion in large-scale social structures. One outcome is that in scientific fields,
new information and ideas are more efficiently diffused through weak ties
(Granovetter, 1983).
There are many more weak ties in social networks than strong ones, and most
such ties may carry information of little significance. But the important point here

1

For detailed technical exposition of social network analysis, see Wasserman and Faust (1994).

Mark Granovetter

35

is that such ties are much more likely than strong ones to play the role of
transmitting unique and nonredundant information across otherwise largely disconnected segments of social networks.2
3) The Importance of “Structural Holes.” Burt (1992) extended and reformulated
the “weak ties” argument by emphasizing that what is of central importance is not
the quality of any particular tie but rather the way different parts of networks are
bridged. He emphasizes the strategic advantage that may be enjoyed by individuals
with ties into multiple networks that are largely separated from one another.
Insofar as they constitute the only route through which information or other
resources may flow from one network sector to another, they can be said to exploit
“structural holes” in the network.
4) The Interpenetration of Economic and Non-Economic Action. Much social life
revolves around a non-economic focus. Therefore, when economic and noneconomic activity are intermixed, non-economic activity affects the costs and the
available techniques for economic activity. This mixing of activities is what I have
called “social embeddedness” of the economy (Granovetter, 1985)—the extent to
which economic action is linked to or depends on action or institutions that are
non-economic in content, goals or processes. Among the kinds of embeddedness
that sociologists have discussed are embeddedness of economic action in social
networks, culture, politics and religion.3
One common example is that a culture of corruption may impose high
economic costs and require many off-the-books transactions to carry on normal
production of goods and services. Such negative aspects of social embeddedness
receive the lion’s share of attention, especially when characterized pejoratively as
“rent seeking.” Less often noted, but probably more important, are savings
achieved when actors pursue economic goals through non-economic institutions
and practices to whose costs they made little or no contribution. For example,
employers who recruit through social networks need not—and probably could
not—pay to create the trust and obligations that motivate friends and relatives to
help one another find employment. Such trust and obligations arise from the way
a society’s institutions pattern kin and friendship ties, and any economic efficiency
gains resulting from them are a byproduct, typically unintended, of actions and
patterns enacted by individuals with noneconomic motivations.
The notion that people often deploy resources from outside the economy to
enjoy cost advantages in producing goods and services raises important questions,
usually sidestepped in social theory, about how the economy interacts with other
social institutions. Such deployment resembles arbitrage in using resources acquired cheaply in one setting for profit in another. As with classic arbitrage, it need
not create economic profits for any particular actor, since if all are able to make the

2

This argument plays a significant role in the recent interdisciplinary literature on complex networks.
See Barabasi (2002), Buchanan (2002) and Watts (2003).
3
The subfield of “economic sociology” is partly built on analysis of these types of embeddedness. For a
representative collection of classic and modern items, with notes and commentary, see Granovetter and
Swedberg (2001).

36

Journal of Economic Perspectives

same use of non-economic resources, none has any cost advantage over any other.
Yet overall efficiency may be improved by reducing everyone’s costs and freeing
some resources for other uses.
But whereas true arbitrage connects previously separated markets that may
then become indistinguishable, the use of extra-economic resources to increase
economic efficiency need not close the gap between the economy and other social
activity, because separate institutional sectors draw their energy from different
sources and consist of distinctly different activities. Many authors have argued that
economic activity penetrates and transforms other parts of social life. Thus, Karl
Marx asserted (for example, in chapter 1 of The Communist Manifesto) that family
and friendship ties would be fully subordinated under modern capitalism to the
“cash nexus.” But despite intimate connections between social networks and the
modern economy, the two have not merged or become identical. Indeed, norms
often develop that limit the merger of sectors. For example, when economic actors
buy and sell political influence, threatening to merge political and economic
institutions, this is condemned as “corruption.” Such condemnation invokes the
norm that political officials are responsible to their constituents rather than to the
highest bidder and that the goals and procedures of the polity are and should be
different and separate from those of the economy.
In what follows, in part with the help of these core principles, I will trace out
the impact of social structure on a series of important economic outcomes. I begin
with the allocation of labor.

Social Structure and Labor Markets
Economic models typically assume that workers and jobs are matched through
a search whose costs and benefits are equalized at the margin (Granovetter, 1995b,
pp. 141–146). But in most real labor markets, social networks play a key role.
Prospective employers and employees prefer to learn about one another from
personal sources whose information they trust. This is an example of what has been
called “social capital” (Lin, 2001). It has obvious links to theories of asymmetric
information (for example, Montgomery, 1991), with the difference that unlike in
most such models, there is what one might call bilateral asymmetry— both employer and employee have information about their own “quality” that the other
needs. In the classic “lemons” model of Akerlof (1970), by contrast, the seller of a
used car considers all buyers interchangeable and does not require subtle information about them.
Because all social interaction unavoidably transmits information, details about
employers, employees and jobs flow continuously through social networks that
people maintain in large part for non-economic reasons. Since individuals use
social contacts and networks already in place, and need not invest in constructing
them, the cost is less than that of more formal search intermediaries. Because
pre-existing networks are unevenly distributed across individuals, whatever social
processes led to these networks will create an uneven playing field in the labor

The Impact of Social Structure on Economic Outcomes

37

market without any actor necessarily having intended to do so (Granovetter, 1995b,
pp. 169 –177).
Economic job search models can obscure how commonly individuals learn
about new jobs in social settings, without having expended resources earmarked for
job search, since survey respondents who deny searching for their present job are
often excluded from further analysis. The proportion of job finders who are
nonsearchers varies from 30 to 60 percent depending on the time and place
surveyed. In the few cases where nonsearchers were carefully scrutinized, the large
majority had found jobs through personal contacts (Granovetter, 1995b,
pp. 140 –146).
Because novel information flows are more likely through weak ties than strong,
acquaintances developed over the span of an entire career play a special role,
though this varies across national and other settings (Granovetter, 1995b,
pp. 160 –162; Montgomery, 1994; Bian, 1997). Whether the use of weak or other
ties in finding jobs significantly affects wages, wage growth, job satisfaction and
productivity has been debated but not resolved. Large aggregated data sets sometimes do not show clear effects (as in Mouw, 2003), but more focused and
specialized samples often do. Because so much of the hiring action in labor markets
occurs through social networks of very different kinds in a wide variety of circumstances, it would be surprising if outcomes were uniform. The resources held by
individuals’ networks, the intentions of employers and macroeconomic conditions
are only three of the important sources of variation in outcomes when networks
route people to jobs (Granovetter, 1995b, pp. 146 –162).
The interdependence among careers and networks of different individuals
leads to interesting modeling possibilities. For example, characterize those who
constitute one’s social network as balls in an urn. Let contacts with useful job
information be red balls and others white. A model of pure heterogeneity suggests
that urn composition is constant, and better connected individuals are those with
a larger proportion of red balls in their urn. But a state dependence model would
suggest that when a person finds a new job through her network, she makes new
connections, so that at the next draw, there would be a larger proportion of red
balls in her urn. What empirical data suggest really happens is more complex still:
that this proportion also depends on whether the people you know have themselves
changed their own urn’s proportions, by moving around from job to job and
improving their own networks, which makes them a better source of information.
So the composition of one’s own urn depends on changes in the urns of those one
is connected to, requiring a more elaborate iterative model that takes account of
the network’s overall structure (Granovetter, 1988, p. 194). The point is that when
mobility results from network connections, it changes network structure that then
feeds back into future mobility patterns. Thus, network structure can be partially
endogenized in labor market analysis.
One implication is that where rates of interfirm mobility are quite low, as in
Japan during the 1970s and 1980s, few workers will ever have worked with others
who are now at different firms. Then, if mobility to a new firm relies heavily on
certification to employers of one’s ability by someone already in that firm, a lack of

38

Journal of Economic Perspectives

mobility between firms will be self-perpetuating, and conversely, when interfirm
mobility is high, that greater mobility may also reproduce itself, as in Silicon Valley
labor markets (Saxenian, 1994).

Social Structure and Prices
When people trade with others they know, the impact of knowing each other
on the price varies with their relationship, the cost of shifting to different partners
and the market situation. To understand how deviations from competitive equilibrium price may occur requires analysis of both the economics and the sociology of
the situation. The theoretical issue is often not one of economic and sociological
arguments conflicting, but rather of the weakness of both in understanding how
actors with simultaneous economic and non-economic motives will act. Since there
are many dimensions along which to classify cases, and insufficient space for a fully
systematic account, I offer a few illustrative examples.
The anthropologist Sahlins (1972) reviews literature on tribal economies
showing that it is typical to trade only with designated others in foreign groups, in
part for protection in distant settings. He suggests that such continuing relations
make prices sticky when supply and demand shift, and revisions that would clear
the market require breaking old relations and forming new ones. A shift of trading
partners is more or less difficult under different circumstances, and depends on the
economic and noneconomic costs of severing a long-time tie and the available
social alternatives. Thus, the “economic flexibility of the system depends on the
social structure of the trade relation” (p. 313) and cannot be predicted without
knowing that social structure.
Studies of peasant markets often suggest that “clientelization,” defined as
dealing exclusively with known buyers and sellers, raises prices above their competitive level (for example, Belshaw, 1965, p. 78; Davis, 1973). This result suggests
an information asymmetry advantage of sellers over buyers, which may result from
buyers having more trouble in gauging quality of goods than sellers do in gauging
creditworthiness of customers (Geertz, 1978). The balance of advantage in bilateral
information asymmetry should determine its impact on price.
Where it is more complex to assess creditworthiness, sellers may lower their
price to achieve the greater certainty that comes with more complex and subtle
information resulting from continuing relations. Thus Uzzi’s (1999) study of
midmarket banking shows that Chicago firms with personal contacts to bankers pay
lower interest rates on loans and that banks cultivate such contacts as a business
strategy. Ferrary (2003) presents comparable results from a broad study of French
banks. Other seller costs beside credit risk may be reduced by detailed personal
knowledge of clients. Thus, Uzzi and Lancaster (2003) show that all else equal,
prices are lower for corporate clients with continuing ties to law firms because the
trust developed over time, and norms of reciprocity, allow the firm and its client to
reach agreement on potentially contentious issues such as what to charge for
knowledge developed for previous clients and applied to the present case. To say

Mark Granovetter

39

that banks and law firms avoid adverse selection (compare Waldman, 2003,
pp. 136 –137) and the costs of complex contracting through continuing personal
contacts is broadly consistent with standard economic arguments, but shows that
such arguments may apply only because actors leverage social relations for economic purposes. It is often not straightforward or feasible to do so, and then actors
with the insight or capacity to manage such relations will accrue advantages.
Few systematic data exist on buyer-seller attachments, but economist Arthur
Okun (1981, p. 148) observed that most markets with repeated purchases are
“customer markets” rather than auction markets, since customers “avoid shopping
costs by sticking with their supplier.” In such markets, prices “rarely, if ever, equal
marginal costs. . .and generally exceed them by a significant margin.” Arguing that
customers pay to economize on search costs is consistent with a range of relationships between customer and supplier, from strong ties of personal friendship to
more impersonal situations where customers pay premiums to well-known firms for
their products, in return for hoped-for guarantees of quality (Klein and Leffler,
1981).
Exactly where buyer-seller relations fall in this range may result in part from
how easy it is to assess quality of goods through brand names or other impersonal
standards. Thus, the 1996 General Social Survey shows that for goods where
assessment is difficult, such as used cars, legal advice and home repairs, one-quarter
to one-half of purchases in the United States are made through personal networks.
Survey respondents reported greater satisfaction with such purchases, and believed
that people receive better prices from personally known sellers (DiMaggio and
Louch, 1998). Since no direct data were collected on prices paid, we cannot be sure
their judgment is correct. If sellers do in fact offer friends and relatives lower prices
than they could get from strangers, this could be one measure of the cost of
obligations they feel in these personal relationships. Elsewhere, I have observed
that some businesses in developing countries may face significantly higher operating costs as the result of such obligations (Granovetter, 1995a).
The discussion thus far concerns only particular buyers and sellers. But largerscale collusion may affect price, and success or failure in such collusion may also
depend on personal relationships. Cartels, for example, may raise prices above
their competitive level, but are liable to defection. To succeed, they must penalize
defectors. One possible penalty is loss of social status in the group, but this penalty
is effective only if a member cares about such status. Cartels may fail when members
socially distant from the dominant group defect. Although some historians have
attributed the demise of American cartels to the sanctions of the Sherman Act in
1890 (Chandler, 1977, chapters 4 –5), in practice such cartels had great difficulty in
the United States even before the Sherman Act had much effect (in roughly 1910).
Lamoreaux (1985, p. 188) suggests that the great merger wave from 1895–1904 in
part responded to the failure of cartels to restrain prices. I suggest that the failure
of many cartels in the later decades of the nineteenth century occurred in part
because of defection by renegade speculators like Jay Gould who were outside the
social and moral compass of other cartel members. Little is known of the social
organization of cartels, but some evidence suggests that countries whose cartels

40

Journal of Economic Perspectives

were more successful, such as Germany, had more socially homogeneous cartel
membership (Maschke, 1969).
An interesting bit of evidence comes from Podolny and Scott-Morton (1999),
who studied British shipping cartels from 1879 to 1929. They find that when
considering how to deal with industry newcomers, participants assessed whether
they would fit well into the moral community that sustained going rates and
practices. They took social status as a good proxy for this probability, assuming that
those with high status matching their own were more likely to comply. Consequently, high-status entrants were substantially less likely to face a price war initiated by existing cartel members. Even in the absence of formal cartels, social
friendship among competitors may impact price and performance. Ingram and
Roberts (2000) studied hotels in Sydney, Australia, and found that friendships
among managers had a clear positive net impact on performance and made it
easier to resist price wars. They also found that these effects were stronger, the
more cohesive the network of friends among hotel managers.
These considerations do not dispute the usual arguments about cartels, but
suggest that these arguments may underdetermine outcomes. Formal or informal
cartels use a mixture of market and nonmarket punishments and incentives to
enforce member cooperation, because members have both economic and noneconomic (for example, friendship and status) goals that they pursue simultaneously. Where important nonmarket forces that affect the success of cartels (or
other forms of economic cooperation) operate through social networks we need
explicit study of these social foundations to help explain outcomes. These cases
illustrate that norms are more easily enforced in dense social networks and also that
pre-existing social institutions impose costs and benefits on economic processes
that build on them.
That people trade with known others may fragment markets and inhibit
formation of a single equilibrium price. Carruthers (1996) studied equity trades in
London during 1712 and found that while many trades were impersonal, this was
not so for shares of the politically charged East India Company, where Whigs and
Tories often preferred trading only with fellow party members to keep shares from
opponents. The majority traded preferentially, but active professional traders did
not and, thus, could profit from discrepancies by arbitrage. This research is broadly
consistent with “noise trader” models as an alternative to the efficient markets
hypothesis (Shleifer and Summers, 1990), but it points to systematic and rational
but non-economic (here political) reasons for traders to deviate from the standard
model.
Personalized trading may fragment markets, however, even when goals are
purely economic. Baker (1984) studied stock options trading on the floor of a
major securities exchange. Prices did not stabilize as numbers of traders increased
(as standard theory predicts); instead, Baker observed that options traded by more
participants exhibited substantially greater price volatility. The reason was that,
seeking trust and social control, each trader dealt with a limited number of known
counterparts. That number is limited by bounds on cognition and physical space
and was not larger for widely traded options. Thus, when the number of traders on

The Impact of Social Structure on Economic Outcomes

41

the floor was significantly larger than the number of trading relationships individuals could sustain, communication became difficult and at times, the group broke
into cliques. Prices in very large trading groups were more volatile than in small
ones, because of the communication problems cited, and proliferation of cliques
resulted in additional overall volatility. A more purely economic explanation for the
association between size of crowd and volatility is that greater price volatility
presents more opportunities for trading profits, which attracts more traders.
Baker’s data and statistical model show that both causal directions operate in his
setting. As in many situations, social and economic forces feed into one another.

Social Structure, Productivity and Compliance
Social relations are also closely linked to productivity. Economic models
attribute productivity to personal traits, modifiable by learning. But one’s position
in a social group can also be a central influence on productivity, for several reasons.
One is that many tasks cannot be accomplished without serious cooperation from
others; another is that many tasks are too complex and subtle to be done “by the
book” (which is why the “rulebook slowdown” is a potent labor weapon) and
require the exercise of “tacit knowledge” appropriable only through interaction
with knowledgeable others. This makes deviance risky. It has been well known since
the 1930s that groups of workers arrive at “quotas” for what is an appropriate
amount to produce and that “rate-busters” risk being ostracized (Homans, 1950).
Groups can severely penalize unwelcome newcomers by failing to convey to them
the vital subtleties of work practices normally learned through interaction (Dalton,
1959, pp. 128 –129), and workers with low group status will appear less skillful for
lack of assistance from others. On the other hand, in some settings, assistance can
be gotten in exchange for status deference, so that those willing to kowtow to
experienced workers may improve their performance (Blau, 1963). This is the dark
side of “mentoring.”
Because good relations with others are key, those entering a firm through
personal contacts have a head start in appearing and being more productive and
avoiding errors that might set back outsiders. Thus, many studies show that quit
rates are lower for those who enter through social networks, even net of ability or
quality of worker (for example, Fernandez, Castilla and Moore, 2000). Because of
measurement difficulties, there are few studies of productivity in relation to entry
route, but see Castilla (2002) for evidence that even in the routinized work of call
centers, there are clear effects of this kind.
Group norms and cultures also shape skill and productivity. Where groups
attach great value to skill, it can become an eagerly sought-after status currency.
Sabel (1982, p. 84) suggests that in the tightly knit social world of craftsmen, social
mobility is far less valued than “technical prowess. . . .Titles are not important,
savoir faire is.” Burawoy (1979, p. 64) notes that in the Chicago machine-shop where
he worked, skill with the machines was the key to group status: “Until I was able to
strut around the floor like an experienced operator, as if I had all the time in the

42

Journal of Economic Perspectives

world and could still make out [produce the quota], few but the greenest would
condescend to engage me in conversation.” Burawoy, a Marxist, laments that this
status system leads workers to cooperate “with management in the production of
greater surplus value”; employers might instead view this as a fortunate leveraging
of social arrangements they did not invest in creating. But for work groups to arrive
at such cultural agreement requires some social network cohesion and consequent
normative consensus. Variations in such settings are little studied, but first principles suggest that high turnover or social fragmentation in work groups would cut
against such consensus. Thus, employers would have reason to recruit through
social networks, insofar as they feel confident the prevailing culture supports their
own goals.4
In the case that Burawoy (1979) describes, employers do not seem aware of
their good fortune, but employers are often more perceptive. Indeed, their relations to workers rarely approximate the daily struggle that Marxism predicts.
Granovetter and Tilly (1988, p. 202) comment that “many workers have opportunities to embezzle, steal, shirk, sabotage and otherwise diminish an enterprise’s
profitability. Some of them take these opportunities. But most do not. . . .Why?
Systems of control make a difference.”
Some systems of control resemble those featured in principal-agent models of
the work relationship—that is, direct surveillance and/or some form of payment by
results or piecework. However, there are also a range of alternatives, not commonly
included in economic analysis, that work through social groups and create compliance in less intrusive ways. A very important example is what we called “loyalty
systems”—attempts to elicit cooperation from workers deriving not only from
incentives but also from identification with the firm or with some set of individuals
that encourages high standards and productivity. Loyalty systems can build on
commitment to a profession. Then, “professional ethics and monitoring provide
some guarantee that a professional employee will perform reliably” (Granovetter
and Tilly, 1988, p. 202). Recruiting from within homogeneous social categories can
be an employer strategy to derive benefit from the loyalty and social control that
already exists within such categories and networks, once these come to operate
within the firm. Loyalty systems benefit from the “intense socialization, prior
screening of their members, membership in groups outside the firm that guarantee
and monitor the worker’s behavior, and extensive off-the-job social relations. Thus
employers have considerable incentives to homogenize new members of the loyalty
system and to recruit them within the same existing social networks” (p. 203).
Loyalty and resulting compliance is, broadly speaking, a political issue. Max
Weber noted the inordinate expense of conducting civil administration through
coercion alone. Instead, he notes the importance of systems where citizens consider
orders from civil administrators to be “legitimate”—they comply with an order or a

4
Some economic literature suggests that under certain conditions, heterogeneity rather than homogeneity increases productivity in work groups. See, for example, Hamilton, Nickerson and Owan (2003).
Since the heterogeneity referred to in this literature is in individual productivity, this need not be
correlated with the social homogeneity that I discuss here, and both effects could operate together.

Mark Granovetter

43

law not only because it is aligned with their incentives, but also because they
consider it appropriate to do so. (See, for example, the exposition of Weber’s ideas
in Bendix, 1979, chapter 9.) Loyalty systems instill in employees similar feelings of
legitimacy.
In Freeland’s (2001) analysis of General Motors from the 1920s to the 1970s,
which draws on extensive archival resources, he emphasizes that compliance of
division managers with orders from headquarters was consummate rather than
perfunctory only when they saw them as legitimate. He writes (p. 31): “[T]he more
extensive the firm’s division of labor, the more problematic it is to secure consent
from subordinates. Increasingly, top executives must justify their decisions in order
to secure the consent of subordinates who possess high levels of expertise. . . .The
simplest way. . .is to allow subordinates to exercise voice in planning and policy
formulation, even if they are not formally responsible for doing so.” The vital task
of maintaining order, he continues (p. 33), “cannot be understood primarily as an
exercise in economizing, for the same arrangements that lead to technical efficiency also disrupt social order in the firm. . . .Governance. . .is an inherently
political process in which top executives must be willing to forge a compromise
between actors in the firm in order to preserve cooperation and promote consummate performance.” Freeland stresses that the issue was not one of disagreement
over policies, since division heads resisted even policies acceptable in principle, if
they had no part in creating them. Full membership in the social organization of
decisions was a prerequisite for perceiving them as legitimate.
For these reasons, the corporate governance question of how the structure of
firms will affect productivity and profit cannot be reduced to the argument that
division managers should stay out of central management, given their likely opportunism on behalf of their own units, while central management should not meddle
in division operating procedures, in which they would have little competency or
knowledge, as proposed in Chandler (1962, 1977) and Williamson (1975). Indeed,
Freeland (2001) finds that General Motors was most profitable in periods when
division heads were fully included in central planning and least when they were
excluded. Thus, the firm cannot be viewed simply as a formal organization, but also
must be understood as having the essential elements of any social community.
Continuing long-term ties do not always unambiguously improve the productivity and profit of individuals and organizations. Uzzi (1996), for example, studied
relations between apparel manufacturers and their subcontractors in the New York
City garment district. He distinguished between “arm’s length” impersonal ties and
“embedded” ties, in which repeated interaction had led to trust and mutual
understanding. He found that relations of trust are not always superior: for example, subcontractors with networks of ties to manufacturers that were uniform—that
is, predominantly embedded ties or predominantly impersonal ties— had a higher
rate of failure than those with a mixture of the two types (pp. 692– 693). He argues
that embedded ties offer considerable advantages in stable situations, but in
periods of change, lock firms into relationships and may inhibit adaptation. Arms’
length ties lack the benefits of trusting interaction but permit more flexibility when

44

Journal of Economic Perspectives

change is needed. Thus, some optimal balance exists among types of ties, and firms
achieving that balance are more likely to survive over varying market conditions.
Mizruchi and Stearns (2001) tell a related cautionary tale about the virtues and
drawbacks of trust. They studied a leading multinational commercial bank at three
locations in the United States, focusing on the use of internal networks in closing
deals with corporate clients. Bank officers sought out others in the bank for
information (about the clients or about the details of a certain type of deal) and for
approval. Under conditions of uncertainty about the nature of the deal or the
client, these bankers were more likely to consult their strong ties—those in the
bank whom they knew well and trusted—for both information and approval. But
surprisingly, this strategy appeared counterproductive in leading to deal closure.
The reason seems to be that while one’s trusted and close colleagues may readily
approve deals, which is a necessary condition for deals to close, they are too
ingrown a group to provide a wide range of constructive input that will enable a
complex deal to be improved in such a way as to meet the needs of the client.
Mizruchi and Stearns comment that uncertainty “creates conditions that trigger a
desire for the familiar, and bankers respond to this by turning to those with whom
they are close. Yet it is this very action that makes it more difficult for the banker
to be successful. Not only does this illustrate the simultaneous weakness of strong
ties and the strength of weak ties, but it also shows how our social instincts can run
counter to our best interests” (p. 667). By contrast, accessing a sparse network by
going through weak ties for formal approval is superior in that it generates “a
diversity of views and potential criticisms that compel the banker to create a higher
quality product” (p. 667), which is then more attractive to the customer.

Social Structure and Innovation
Many studies, comprehensively reviewed in Rogers (2003), show the powerful
impact of social structure and networks on the extent and source of innovation and
its diffusion. Here, I focus on innovations especially relevant to markets.
One example is innovation in what is considered a marketable commodity.
Contrary to Marxist assumptions, the market does not commodify every aspect of
human life. But items proscribed at one point in time can later become routine
commodities. Zelizer (1978) traces the case of life insurance, which early
nineteenth-century Americans saw as sacrilege, or at best gambling, but which by
the late 1800s had established itself as a breadwinner’s obligation. She notes that
the insurance industry, to achieve this transformation, made use of religious
language and secured the support of clergy who urged on their flocks the necessity
of providing for family after death, making this a sacred duty. This personal
connection seemed indispensable in attaching ritual and symbolic significance to
this otherwise rather bloodless commodity.
Because participants in such discussions were no longer living, Zelizer (1978)
relied on pamphlets, diaries and other documentary evidence to understand the
normative changes that transformed insurance from profane gambling to sacred

The Impact of Social Structure on Economic Outcomes

45

obligation. MacKenzie and Millo (2003) studied the more recent emergence of
financial derivatives as a legitimate product. Through interviews, they reconstructed in detail the social network process by which the perception of options
changed from that of dubious gamble to respected financial instrument. They note
that while in 1970, financial derivatives were so unimportant that no reliable figures
could be found for market size, by 2000, the notional value of such contracts
worldwide was in excess of $100 trillion.
They traced the origins of the Chicago Board of Options Exchange, interviewing the leading participants and options theorists. The CBOE had its origins in the
Chicago Board of Trade (CBT), which had traded commodity futures since the
mid-nineteenth century. Stock options and futures had also been traded in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but lost legitimacy after the 1929 crash
and the Great Depression. When members of CBT approached the Securities and
Exchange Commission in the late 1960s about a market for options trading, they
met considerable hostility, based on the idea that financial options were mere
gambling. But members of the CBT mounted an intensive lobbying campaign,
assisted by new economic theory emerging in the 1960s on the valuation of options
and other derivatives. MacKenzie and Millo (2003) trace this lobbying activity,
arguing that it was difficult, time consuming and not in the self-interest of those
who organized and led it. Some will suspect that those who lobbied in this way
profited from the innovation, so that simple economic incentives would be sufficient to explain their activity. But Mackenzie and Millo provide evidence that the
key individuals in the effort incurred large unremunerated expenses, and substantial opportunity costs from foregone trading profits, with no obvious prospect of
ever recovering these (pp. 115–116). In explaining this activity, they emphasize that
the Chicago exchanges were highly personalized settings, with clear demarcation
between insiders and outsiders, where intensive interaction among insiders led to
social control and the potential for collective action that transcended economic
incentives. Thus, socially cohesive and prominent insiders, allied with economic
theorists and mainstream political figures, achieved the institutionalization of this
economic innovation.
But not all innovations arise from the social inner circle. Indeed, the socially
marginal may at times be best placed to break away from established practice
(Granovetter, 1973, pp. 1366 –1368), as they are not involved in dense, cohesive
social networks of strong ties that create a high level of consensus on such practice.
Thus, studies indicate that the lower an innovation’s champion in a corporate
hierarchy, the more radical the innovation (Day, 1994).
A striking case is that of “junk bonds.” Around 1970, young trader Michael
Milken became fascinated by the profit potential of low-rated bonds. At first, his
employer, Drexel Firestone, reluctantly tolerated his activity. But when Milken
succeeded dramatically, Drexel increased his capital and autonomy. He built a
substantial clientele while his firm was the only one willing to make markets in such
bonds (Abolafia, 1996). When traditional firms became interested, Milken “antagonized them by refusing to share initial offerings with a syndicate” (p. 158). He

46

Journal of Economic Perspectives

made junk bonds into a cause, asserting that they provided capital otherwise denied
by the financial establishment to mid-sized companies outside the corporate elite.
Resistance to Milken resulted from the 1980s use of junk bonds for hostile
takeovers that enabled small companies, led by non-elite raiders such as Saul
Steinberg and T. Boone Pickens, to launch takeover attempts against large and
prominent corporations. Target firms mobilized their considerable political allies.
In 1985, the Federal Reserve curbed the use of junk bonds in acquisitions, and by
1987, 37 states had passed legislation restricting takeover activity. With the role of
junk bonds in takeovers curbed, other uses could flourish, and the junk bond
market has become a fixed-income staple. But Milken himself was prosecuted
vigorously and barred from the securities business for life. His marginal location in
key social networks made this outcome more likely. The larger point is that
junk-bond-driven takeovers threatened elite social networks that mobilized political
support in ways that social outsiders could not overcome.
More generally, innovation means breaking away from established routines.
Schumpeter defined entrepreneurship as the creation of new opportunities by
pulling together previously unconnected resources for a new economic purpose.
One reason resources may be unconnected is that they reside in separated networks
of individuals or transactions. Thus, the actor who sits astride structural holes in
networks (as described in Burt, 1992) is well placed to innovate. The Norwegian
anthropologist Fredrik Barth (1967) paid special attention to situations where
goods traded against one another only in restricted circuits of exchange. He
defined “entrepreneurship” as the ability to derive profit from breaching such
previously separated spheres of exchange. The Fur of the Sudan, for example,
considered wage labor shameful, and in this group, labor and money traded in
separate spheres. Certain products, such as millet and beer, did not trade for
money, but were produced only for exchange in communal labor, such as mutual
help with house building. In a separate circuit, food, tools and other commodities
were exchanged for money. Barth reports the arrival of outsider Arab merchants
who, not bound by the norms specifying the separation of spheres, paid local
workers with beer, to grow tomatoes, a cash crop. Unaware of the cash value of beer
or labor, the workers produced a crop worth far more than the beer with which they
were paid, making the traders wealthy (see also Granovetter, 2002, pp. 44 – 46).
Deployment of resources outside of their usual spheres may often be a source
of profit, and new institutional forms can facilitate such deployment. The origins of
“venture capital” in Silicon Valley is an example. Before the 1960s, high technology
was funded by financiers largely decoupled from the industry’s social or professional networks, who were not fully conversant with the technical detail. But the
usual financial tools could not evaluate innovations during a time of rapid technical
change. A new model emerged: engineers and marketing specialists from industry,
who had accrued enormous profits, used these to become a new breed of financier:
the “venture capitalist.” Their technical knowledge and extensive personal networks allowed them to assess new ideas more adeptly than traditional bankers.
Given their skills, they were also more inclined to sit on boards of directors, and
take active management roles, supporting the substantial equity positions their

Mark Granovetter

47

firms took in startups (Kaplan, 1999, chapters 6 –7). Taking their financial resources from the industrial and family spheres where they were accumulated, and
deploying them in the newly created institutional setting of venture capital, made
the early innovators fabulously wealthy. Their early success helped them draw a
huge new inflow of funds from such limited partners as pension funds and wealthy
individuals, who stood well apart from technical circles, just as early nineteenthcentury business families founded New England banks to fund expansion of
industries by drawing in non-family funds (Lamoreaux, 1994).
Can we explain this outcome by a standard efficiency argument, in which
environmental changes made new financial practices more profitable? The problem for such an account is that these practices did not emerge uniformly where
profits were available. Saxenian (1994, pp. 64 – 65 and elsewhere) argues that
because of differences in culture and social networks between Silicon Valley and
the high-technology industry region in the Boston area, finance in the latter region
retained its traditional dominance by individuals without technical backgrounds,
who could not move quickly to spot and finance new trends, putting the region at
considerable long-term disadvantage. To the extent her argument is correct, Boston and other regions will have difficulty emulating the Silicon Valley model, even
in the long run. Further empirical study will provide interesting clarification of this
clash between economic logic and social constraint.

Conclusion
Social structure affects many important economic outcomes other than those
addressed here, such as choice of alliance partners (for example, Gulati and
Gargiulo, 1999), decisions to acquire other firms and strategies used to do so
(Haunschild, 1994), the diffusion of corporate governance techniques (Davis and
Greve, 1999) and the persistence of large family and ethnically oriented business
groups in advanced economies (Granovetter, 2004), among others. In this paper,
I have chosen a few examples to illustrate strategies, approaches and principles.
While economic models can be simpler if the interaction of the economy with
non-economic aspects of social life remains inside a black box, this strategy abstracts from many social phenomena that strongly affect costs and available techniques for economic action. Excluding such phenomena is risky if prediction is the
goal. When the black box is opened, it is often with the goal of making networks,
norms, institutions, history and culture fully endogenous to economic models,
implicitly assuming that otherwise no systematic argument can be made. But
pursuing this daunting agenda makes poor use of economists’ comparative advantage. The disciplines that neighbor economics have made considerable progress in
unpacking the dynamics of social phenomena, and a more efficient strategy would
be to engage in interdisciplinary cooperation of the sort that trade theory commends to nations. My goal here has been to suggest some such linkages, which
remain largely unexplored, and pose one of the greatest intellectual challenges to
the social sciences.

48

Journal of Economic Perspectives

y I am grateful for the extensive comments of Timothy Taylor, Michael Waldman and Andrei
Shleifer, which significantly improved this paper.

References
Abolafia, Mitchel. 1996. Making Markets: Opportunism and Restraint on Wall Street. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Akerlof, George. 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 84:3,
pp. 488 –500.
Baker, Wayne. 1984. “The Social Structure of
a National Securities Market.” American Journal of
Sociology. January, 89, pp. 775– 811.
Barabasi, Albert-Laszlo. 2002. Linked: The New
Science of Networks. New York: Perseus Books.
Belshaw, Cyril S. 1965. Traditional Exchange
and Modern Markets. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.
Bendix, Reinhard. 1979. Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press.
Bian, Yanjie. 1997. “Bringing Strong Ties Back
In: Indirect Ties, Network Bridges, and Job
Searches in China.” American Sociological Review.
June, 62, pp. 366 – 85.
Blau, Peter. 1963. The Dynamics of Bureaucracy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Buchanan, Mark. 2002. Nexus: Small Worlds and
the Groundbreaking Science of Networks. New York:
W.W. Norton.
Burawoy, Michael. 1979. Manufacturing Consent: Changes in the Labor Process Under Monopoly
Capitalism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Burt, Ronald. 1992. Structural Holes: The Social
Structure of Competition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Calvó-Armengol, Antoni. 2004. “Job Contact
Networks.” Journal of Economic Theory. 115:1,
pp. 191–206.
Carruthers, Bruce. 1996. City of Capital: Politics
and Markets in the English Financial Revolution.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Castilla, Emilio J. 2002. “Social Networks and
Employee Performance.” Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Sociology, Stanford University.
Chandler, Alfred D. 1977. The Visible Hand:
The Managerial Revolution in American Business.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Dalton, Melville. 1959. Men Who Manage. New
York: Wiley.
Davis, Gerald and Henrich Greve. 1999. “Corporate Elite Networks and Governance Changes
in the 1980s.” American Journal of Sociology. 103,
pp. 1–37.
Davis, William G. 1973. Social Relations in a
Philippine Market: Self-Interest and Subjectivity.
Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press.
Day, Diana. 1994. “Raising Radicals: Different
Processes for Championing Innovative Corporate Ventures.” Organization Science. 5:2,
pp. 148 –72.
DiMaggio, Paul and Hugh Louch. 1998. “Socially Embedded Consumer Transactions: For
What Kinds of Purchases do People Most Often
Use Networks?” American Sociological Review. 63:5,
pp. 619 –37.
Dutta, Bhaskar and Matthew O. Jackson. 2003.
Networks and Groups: Models of Strategic Formation.
Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Fernandez, Roberto M., Emilio J. Castilla and
Paul Moore. 2000. “Social Capital at Work: Networks and Employment at a Phone Center.”
American Journal of Sociology. 105:5, pp. 1288 –356.
Ferrary, Michel. 2003. “Trust and Social Capital in the Regulation of Lending Activities.” Journal of Socioeconomics. 31:6, pp. 673–99.
Festinger, Leon, Stanley Schachter and Kurt
Back. 1948. Social Pressures in Informal Groups.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Freeland, Robert. 2001. The Struggle for Control
of the Modern Corporation: Organizational Change at
General Motors, 1924 –1970. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Geertz, Clifford. 1978. “The Bazaar Economy:
Information and Search in Peasant Marketing.”
American Economic Review. 68:2, pp. 28 –32.
Granovetter, Mark. 1973. “The Strength of
Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology. 78:6,
pp. 1360 –380.
Granovetter, Mark. 1983. “The Strength of
Weak Ties: A Network Theory Revisited.” Sociological Theory. 1, pp. 201–33.

The Impact of Social Structure on Economic Outcomes

Granovetter, Mark. 1985. “Economic Action
and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness.” American Journal of Sociology. 91:3,
pp. 481–510.
Granovetter, Mark. 1988. “The Sociological
and Economic Approaches to Labor Market
Analysis: A Social Structural View,” in Industries,
Firms and Jobs: Sociological and Economic Approaches. George Farkas and Paula England, eds.
New York: Plenum Press, pp. 233– 63.
Granovetter, Mark. 1995a. “The Economic Sociology of Firms and Entrepreneurs,” in The Economic Sociology of Immigration. Alejandro Portes,
ed. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
pp. 128 – 65.
Granovetter, Mark. 1995b. Getting a Job: A
Study of Contacts and Careers. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Granovetter, Mark. 2002. “A Theoretical
Agenda for Economic Sociology,” in The New
Economic Sociology: Developments in an Emerging
Field. Mauro F. Guillen, Randall Collins, Paula
England and Marshall Meyer, eds. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 35–59.
Granovetter, Mark. 2005. “Business Groups
and Social Organization,” in Handbook of Economic Sociology, 2nd Edition. Neil and Richard
Swedberg Smelser, eds. New York and Princeton: Russell Sage Foundation and Princeton
University Press, forthcoming.
Granovetter, Mark and Richard Swedberg.
2001. The Sociology of Economic Life, 2nd Edition.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Granovetter, Mark and Charles Tilly. 1988.
“Inequality and Labor Processes,” in Handbook of
Sociology. Neil Smelser, ed. Newbury Park, Calif.:
Sage Publications, pp. 175–221.
Gulati, Ranjay and Martin Gargiulo. 1999.
“Where do Interorganizational Networks Come
From?” American Journal of Sociology. 104:5,
pp. 1439 – 493.
Hamilton, Barton H., Jack Nickerson and
Hideo Owan. 2003. “Team Incentives and
Worker Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of
the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation.” Journal of Political Economy. 111:3,
pp. 465–97.
Haunschild, Pamela. 1994. “How Much is
That Company Worth?: Interorganizational Relationships, Uncertainty and Acquisition Premiums.” Administrative Science Quarterly. September,
39, pp. 391– 411.
Homans, George. 1950. The Human Group.
New York: Harcourt.
Ingram, Paul and Peter Roberts. 2000.
“Friendships Among Competitors in the Sydney
Hotel Industry.” American Journal of Sociology.
106:2, pp. 387– 423.

49

Kaplan, David. 1999. The Silicon Boys. New
York: William Morrow.
Klein, Benjamin and Keith Leffler. 1981. “The
Role of Market Forces in Assuring Contractual
Performance.” Journal of Political Economy. 89:4,
pp. 615– 40.
Lamoreaux, Naomi. 1985. The Great Merger
Movement in American Business, 1895–1904. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lamoreaux, Naomi. 1994. Insider Lending.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lin, Nan. 2001. Social Capital: A Theory of Social
Structure and Action. New York: Cambridge University Press.
MacKenzie, Donald and Yuval Millo. 2003.
“Constructing a Market, Performing a Theory:
The Historical Sociology of a Financial Derivatives Exchange.” American Journal of Sociology.
109:1, pp. 107– 45.
Maschke, Erich. 1969. “Outline of the History
of German Cartels from 1873 to 1914,” in Essays
in European Economic History. F. Crouzet, W. H.
Chaloner and N. M. Stern, eds. London: Edward
Arnold, pp. 226 –58.
Mizruchi, Mark and Linda Stearns. 2001. “Getting Deals Done: The Use of Social Networks in
Bank Decision-Making.” American Sociological Review. 66:5, pp. 647–71.
Montgomery, James D. 1991. “Social Networks
and Labor Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic Analysis.” American Economic Review. December, 81, pp. 1408 – 418.
Montgomery, James D. 1994. “Weak Ties, Employment and Inequality: An Equilibrium Analysis.” American Journal of Sociology. 99:5, pp. 1212–
236.
Mouw, Theodore. 2003. “Social Capital and
Finding a Job: Do Contacts Matter?” American
Sociological Review. 68:6, pp. 868 –98.
Podolny, Joel M. and Fiona M. Scott-Morton.
1999. “Social Status, Entry and Predation: The
Case of British Shipping Cartels 1879 –1929.”
Journal of Industrial Economics. 47:1, pp. 41– 67.
Rauch, James E. and Alessandra Casella. 2001.
Networks and Markets. New York: Russell Sage.
Rogers, Everett. 2003. The Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition. New York: Free Press.
Sabel, Charles F. 1982. Work and Politics : The
Division of Labor in Industry. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Sahlins, Marshall David. 1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.
Saxenian, Annalee. 1994. Regional Advantage:
Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route
128. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

50

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Shleifer, Andrei and Lawrence Summers.
1990. “The Noise Trader Approach to Finance.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 4:2, pp. 19 –33.
Uzzi, Brian. 1996. “The Sources and Consequences of Embeddedness for the Economic
Performance of Organizations: The Network Effect.” American Sociological Review. 61:4, pp. 674 –
98.
Uzzi, Brian. 1999. “Embeddedness in the Making of Financial Capital: How Social Relations
and Networks Benefit Firms Seeking Financing.”
American Sociological Review. August, 64, pp. 481–
505.
Uzzi, Brian and Ryon Lancaster. 2003. “Structural Embeddedness and the Price of Legal Services in the Large Law Firm Market.” Preprint:

Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern
University.
Waldman, Michael. 2003. “Durable Goods
Theory for Real World Markets.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17:1, pp. 131–54.
Wasserman, Stanley and Katherine Faust.
1994. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Watts, Duncan. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of
a Connected Age. New York: W. W. Norton.
Zelizer, Viviana. 1978. “Human Values and
the Market: The Case of Life Insurance and
Death in 19th-Century America.” American Journal of Sociology. 84:3, pp. 591– 610.
Zuckerman, Ezra. 2003. “On Networks and Markets by Rauch and Casella, eds.” Journal of Economic Literature. 41:2, pp. 545– 65.

